There are three books in the Bible known as the wisdom literature
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes and Job
The first proverbs showed us that God is wise and just
Yeah we learned that God has ordered the world so that it's fair
the righteous are rewarded the wicked are punished
in other words you get what you deserve.
But then we meet Ecclesiastes who observes people don't always get what they deserve
Yeah he said the world isn't always fair.
The life is unpredictable and hard to comprehend just like smoke.
And this makes you wonder okay well is God wise and just?
Exactly and so it's that question that is being
explored in the final book of wisdom Job.
Alright let's dive in.
The satan inflicts suffering on Job
So Job begins with the strange story that takes place up in the heavens which are described
something like a heavenly command center.
So God is there with these angelic creatures called the sons of God and
they're all their reporting for duty.
And God points out this guy Job his servant showing our righteous and good he is.
Then one of these angelic creatures approaches He's referred to in Hebrew as
The Satan.
The Satan, who is this?
Well, this word is actually a title which literally means the one who is opposed.
So out of this whole crew he is the one questioning how God is running the world.
And he proposes that Job might not actually love God
that he's only a good person because God rewards him.
If God were to take away all of the good things he gave to Job then
we would see his true colors.
So he thinks Job is just working the system?
That's exactly right. Maybe he's obeying just to get what he wants.
So God agrees to this experiment and allows the Satan to
inflict suffering on Job.
And Job losses everyone and everything that he cares about. It is devastating.
And remember he deserves none of this God himself said so
The remarkable thing is that in the midst of all this suffering,
Job still praises God.
At least for chapters one and two.
Job curses the day he was born
But then in chapter 3 we find out how he's really feeling inside.
He unleashes this poem that reveals this devastation.
It's a long elaborate curse on the day that he was born
Job's friends come to offer help
After this some of Job's friends come to visit him
to offer their help and all of them are like
Job, you must have done something horribly wrong to deserve this.
After all, we know God is just and we know the world is ordered by God's justice and fairness
so you must be getting what you deserve.
And for the next thirty four chapters the friends and Job go back and forth
in very dense Hebrew poetry.
His friends keep speculating about why God might have sent such suffering
and even start making up lists of hypothetical sins that Job must have committed.
But after each accusation Job defends his innocence.
And Job is innocent.
He is! He's also on an emotional roller coaster
At some moments he's very confident that God is still wise and just.
Yet in other moments he's doubting God's goodness.
He even comes to accuse God of being reckless unfair and corrupt.
So by the end of the dialogue Job demands that God come and explain himself in person.
Job demands that God explain himself
And God does so he comes in the form of a great storm cloud
Now God doesn't give Job a direct answer.
He doesn't tell Job about the conversation with the Satan
Yeah he does something very different . He takes Job on a virtual tour of the universe.
He shows Job how grand the world is.
And he asked him if he's even capable of running it or
understanding it just for a day .
He shows how much detail there is in the world.
Things that we might see every day but really don't understand at all.
But God does he knows it all intimately.
He pays attention to the beauty and operations of the universe in ways that we haven't even imagined
and in places that we will never see.
Then to conclude God shows Job two wonderous beasts and
brags about how great they are.
Yeah they are dangerous.
I mean they would kill you without even thinking about it
And God says they're not evil.
They're actually a part of his good world.
And then that's it that's God's whole defense.
It's kind of weird. I mean what was this all about?
The point of the story of Job
It seems to be this. From Job's point of view it looks like God is not just.
But God's perspective is infinitely bigger.
He is dynamically interacting with a whole universe of complexity when he makes decisions.
And this is what God calls his wisdom.
So Job asking God to defend himself is actually kind of absurd.
He couldn't comprehend this kind of complexity even if he wanted to.
So where does this leave us?
Well, leaves Job in a place of humility. He never learned why he suffered.
And yet he's able to live in peace and in the fear of the Lord
God restores Job
But that's not where the book ends because after this God restores to Job double everything he had lost.
And this again is surprising. I mean, is this a reward, is God saying
"Congratulations Job you passed this elaborate test."
No I mean the whole book just made the
point that Job losing everything was not a punishment and so now getting it back isn't a reward.
So why does he get it back?
Apparently God in His wisdom decided to give Job a gift
we don't know why but what we do know is that
Job is now the kind of person who no matter what comes
good or bad he can trust God's wisdom
And that's the book of Job and the end of our wisdom series.
These biblical books of wisdom are amazing.
Each one offers a unique perspective on the good life.
And you need to hear all of them together
as you learn to live with wisdom and in the fear of the Lord
hey guys thank you for watching this
video from the Bible project you can
find a lot more videos just like this
one on our youtube channel the Bible
project or at our website join the Bible
project.com this was the final video in
our wisdom series it's been super fun to
make we hope they were helpful for you
for making videos like this because we
believe the Bible is a unified story
that leads to Jesus and has wisdom for
the modern world so we're making videos
that explore every book of the Bible its
unique design main ideas
we're also making themed videos that
explore key ideas that run through the
whole storyline of the scriptures we
have more videos planned and we can do








The book of Genesis is the first book of the Bible and it's storyline divides into two main parts
There's chapters 1-11, which tell the story of God and the whole world, and then there's chapters 12-50
which zoom in and tell the story of God and just one man, Abraham, and then his family.
And these two parts are connected by a hinge story at the beginning of chapter 12.
And this design, it gives us a clue as to how to understand the message of the book as a whole and how it
introduces the story of the whole Bible. So the book begins with God taking the disorder and the
The creation story, God's divine purpose and human choice
darkness described in the second sentence of the Bible and God brings out of it order and beauty and
goodness and he makes out of it a world where life can flourish. And God makes these creatures called humans
or "adam," in Hebrew. He makes them in his image, which has to do with their role and purpose in God's world.
So humans are made to be reflections of God's character out into the world.
And they're appointed as God's representatives to rule his world on his behalf, which in context
means to harness all its potential, to care for it, and make it where even more life can flourish.
God blesses the humans. It's a key word in this book. And he gives them a garden, a place from which they
begin starting to build this new world. Now the key is that the humans have a choice about how they're
going to go about building this world and that's represented by the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
Up till now, God has provided and defined what is good and what is not good. But now God is giving humans the
dignity and the freedom of a choice: Are they going to trust God's definition of good and evil or are they
going to seize autonomy and define good and evil for themselves? And the stakes are really high.
To rebel against God is to embrace death because you're turning away from the giver of life himself.
This is represented by the Tree of Life. And so in chapter 3, a mysterious figure, a snake, enters into the story.
The snake and the fall of man
The snake's given no introduction other than it's a creature that God made.
And it becomes clear that it's a creature in rebellion against God and it wants to lead the humans into rebellion and their death.
The snake tells a different story about the tree and the choice.
It says that seizing the knowledge of good and evil are not going to bring death and that it's actually the
way to life and becoming like God themselves. Now the irony of this is tragic because we know the humans
are already like God--they were made to reflect God's image. But instead of trusting God, the humans seize autonomy,
they take the knowledge of good and evil for themselves, and in an instant the whole story
spirals out of control. The first casualty is human relationships. The man and the woman
they suddenly realize how vulnerable they are. Now they can't even trust each other. And so they make clothes
and they hide their bodies from one another. The second casualty is that intimacy between God and humans is
lost. So they go, run, and hide from God. And then when God finds them, they start this game of
blame-shifting about who rebelled first. Now right here this story stops and there's a series of short poems
God's promise to rescue humans
where God declares to the snake, and then to the humans, the tragic consequences of their actions.
God first tells the snake that despite it's apparent victory, it is destined for defeat, to eat dust.
God promises that one day a seed, or a descendant, will come from the woman, who's going to deliver a lethal strike to the snakes head.
Which sounds like great news, but this victory is going to come with a cost because the snake, too,
will deliver a lethal strike to the descendant's heal as it's being crushed.
It's a very mysterious promise of this wounded victor. But in the flow of the story so far, you see that
this is an act of God's grace. The humans, they've just rebelled. And what does God do?
He promises to rescue them. But this doesn't erase the consequences of the humans' decision.
So God informs them that now every aspect of their life together--at home, in the field--it's going to be
fraught with grief and pain because of the rebellion, all leading to their death.
The results of the human rebellion
From here, the story then spirals downward. Chapters 3-11, they trace the widening ripple effect
of the rebellion and of human relationships fracturing at every level.
So there's the story of two brothers, Cain and Abel. Cain is so jealous of his brother that he wants to murder him.
And God warns him not to give in to the temptation but he does anyway. He murders him in the field.
So Cain then goes on to build a city where violence and oppression reign. And this is all epitomized in this story
of Lamech. He's the first man in the Bible to have more than one wife. He's accumulating them like property.
And then he goes on to sing a short song about how he's more violent and vengeful than Cain ever was.
After this we get an odd story about the "sons of God, " which could refer to evil, angelic beings,
or it could refer to ancient kings who claimed that they descended from the gods.
And like Lamech, they acquired as many wives as they wanted and they produced the Nephilim, these great warriors of old.
Whichever view is right, the point is that humans are building kingdoms that fill God's world with violence and even more corruption.
Noah's flood and the aftermath
In response, we are told that God is broken with grief, humanity is ruining his good world and they're ruining each other.
And so out of a passion to protect the goodness of his world, he washes it clean of humanity's evil with a great flood.
But he protects one blameless human--Noah, and his family. And he commissions him as a new Adam.
He repeats the divine blessing and commissions him to go out into the world. And so our hopes are really high
but then Noah fails too. and also in a garden. He goes and he plants a vineyard and he gets drunk out of his mind.
And then one of his sons, Ham, does something shameful to his father in the tent. And so, here we have our new "adam," naked and ashamed,
just like the first. And the downward spiral begins again. It all leads to the foundation of the city of Babylon.
The city of Babylon
The people of ancient Mesopotamia, they come together around this new technology they have--the brick.
And they can make cities and towers bigger and faster than anybody's ever done before. And they want to build
a new kind of tower that will reach up to the gods and they will make a great name for themselves.
It's an image of human rebellion and arrogance. It's the garden rebellion now writ large.
And so God humbles their pride and scatters them. Now this is a diverse group of stories but you can see
Genesis 1-11 summary
they're all exploring the same basic point: God keeps giving humans the chance to do the right thing
with his world and humans keep ruining it. These stories are making a claim that we live in a good world that we have turned bad--
that we've all chosen to define good and evil for ourselves and so we all contribute
to this world of broken relationships, leading to conflict, and violence, and ultimately death.
But there's hope. God promised that one day a descendant would come--
the wounded victor who will defeat evil at its source. And so despite humanity's evil, God is determined to bless and rescue his world.
And so the big question is, of course, "What is God going to do?" And the next story, the hinge, offers the answer.
But for now, that's what Genesis 1-11 is all about.






The Book of the Revelation of Jesus
The author of this book, which is not called Revelations by the way,
is named at the beginning. It was written by John
which could refer to the Beloved Disciple who wrote the gospel and the letters of John
or it could be a different John - a Messianic Jewish prophet who traveled
about and taught in early church.
Whichever John it was, he makes clear in the opening paragraph what kind of book he has written.
He calls it first of all a revelation or apocalypse.
The greek word is Apokalypsis and it refers to a type
of literature very familiar to John's readers
from the Hebrew scriptures and from other popular Jewish texts.
Apokalypsis recounted a prophet's symbolic dreams and visions that
revealed God's heavenly perspective on history and current events
so that the present could be viewed in light of history's final outcome.
And John says this apocalypse is a prophecy which
means it's a word from God spoken through a prophet to God's people,
usually to warn or comfort them in a time of crisis.
By calling this book of prophecy, John saying that it stands in the tradition of the biblical prophets
and is bringing their message to a climax.
And this apocalyptic prophecy was sent to real people that John knew.
The book opens and closes as a circular letter
that was sent to seven churches in the ancient Roman province of Asia.
Now seven is a meaningful number for John.
It's a symbol of completeness based on the seven-day Sabbath cycle in the Old Testament.
And John has woven sevens into every single part of this book.
Now with this opening John has given us
clear guidance about how he wants us to understand this book.
Jewish apocalypse is communicated through symbolic imagery and numbers.
It is not a secret predictive code about the timing of the end of the world
rather John is constantly using these symbols that are drawn from the Old Testament
and he expects his readers to go discover what the symbols mean by looking up the text he's alluding to.
Also the fact that it's a letter means that John is actually addressing the situation of these first century churches.
And so while this book has much to say to Christians of later generations,
the books meaning must first be anchored in the historical context of John's time, place, and audience.
Jesus' message to the seven churches
which brings us into the book's first section
Jesus' message to the seven churches
John was exiled on the island of Patmos
and he saw a vision of the risen Jesus exalted as king of the world.
And He was standing among seven burning lights.
and John's told this is a symbol of the seven churches in Asia Minor
that's been adapted from the book of the Prophet Zechariah.
And Jesus starts addressing the specific problems that face each church
Some where apathetic due to wealth and affluence. Others were morally compromised.
Their people were still eating ritual meals, and sleeping around, and pagan temples.
But others among the churches remained faithful to Jesus.
And they were suffering harassment and even violent persecution.
And Jesus warns that things are going to get worse.
A tribulation is upon the churches that will force them to choose between compromise or faithfulness.
By John's day the murder of Christians by the Roman Emperor Nero was passed.
And the persecution of Christians by Emperor Domitian was likely underway.
And so the temptation was to deny Jesus either to avoid persecution or simply to join the spirit of the Roman age.
And Jesus calls them to faithfulness so that they can overcome or literally conquer.
And Jesus promises a reward for everyone in these churches who does conquer.
Each reward is drawn directly from the books final vision about the marriage of heaven and earth.
And so this opening section it sets up the main plot tension that will drive the storyline in this book.
Will Jesus' people endure? Will they inherit the new world that God has in store?
And why is faithfulness to Jesus described as conquering.
The rest of the book is John's answer.
John's vision of the throne of God
After this John has a vision of God's heavenly throne room and
he describes it with imagery drawn from many Old Testament prophets.
Surrounding God are creatures and elders that represent all creation and human nations
and they're giving honor and allegiance to the one true Creator God who is holy holy holy.
In God's hand is a scroll that's closed up with seven wax seals.
It symbolizes the message of the Old Testament prophets and the sealed scroll of Daniel's visions.
these are all about how God's kingdom will come here fully on earth as in heaven
But it turns out no one is able to open the scroll
until John hears of someone who can.
It's the lion from the tribe of Judah and the root of David he can open it.
These are classic Old Testament desciptions of the Messianic King
who would bring God's kingdom through military conquest.
Now that's what John hears but
then what he turns and sees is not an aggressive lion king
but a sacrifice bloody lamb who's alive standing there
and ready to open the scroll.
Now the symbol of Jesus as the slain lamb,
this is crucially important for understanding the book.
John's saying that the Old Testament promise of God's future victorious kingdom
was inaugurated through the crucified Messiah.
Jesus overcame his enemies by dying for them
as the true Passover lamb so that they could be redeemed.
Because of the Resurrection Jesus's death on the cross was not a defeat,
it was his enthronement it was the way he conquered evil.
And so this vision concludes with the lamb
alongside the one sitting on the throne and together they are worshipped
as the one true creator and Redeemer and the slain lamb begins to open the scroll.
It's a symbol of His divine authority to guide history to its conclusion.
The cycle of the seven seals
Which brings us to the next section of the book the three cycles of sevens
seven seals, seven trumpets, and seven bowls.
And each cycle depicts God's kingdom and justice coming here on earth as in heaven.
Now some people think that the three sets of seven divine judgment
represent a literal linear sequence of events
that either happened in the past
or could be happening now
or are yet to happen in the future when Jesus returns.
But notice how John has woven all the sevens together
so the final seven bowls come out of the seventh trumpet and the seventh seal.
and the seven trumpets emerge from the seventh seal
They're like nesting dolls - each seventh contained to the next seven.
Also notice how each of the series of seven culminates in the final judgment
and they have matching conclusions.
So it's more likely that John is using each set of seven to depict the same period of time
between Jesus's resurrection and future returned from three different perspectives.
So the slain lamb begins to open the scrolls first four seals
and John sees four horsemen. It's an image from the book of Zechariah chapter one.
And they symbolize times of war, conquest, famine, and death.
In other words a tragically average day in human history.
Then the fifth seal depicts the murdered Christian martyrs before God's heavenly throne.
And the cry of their innocent blood rises up before God
like smoke from the altar of incense.
And they're told to rest because more Christians are yet to die.
We're not told why but we are told that it won't last forever
the sixth seal is God's ultimate response to their cry.
He brings the great day of the Lord that was described in Isaiah and Joel.
And the people of the earth cry out 'Who is able to stand?!'
And then all of a sudden John pauses the action with an intermission to answer that question
John sees an angel with a signet ring coming to place a mark of protection on God's servants
who are enduring all this hardship
and he hears the number of those who are sealed - a hundred and forty-four thousand.
It's a military census like the one in the Book of Numbers chapter one.
There are twelve thousand from each of the twelve tribes of Israel.
Now pay attention. The number of this army is what John heard.
Just like he heard about the conquering lion of Judah.
But in both cases what he then turned and saw was
the surprising fulfillment of those military images in Jesus the slain lamb.
So when he sees this messianic army of God's kingdom.
It's made up of people from all nations fulfilling God's ancient promise to Abraham.
It's this multi-ethnic army of the Lamb who can stand before God
because they've been redeemed by the lamb's blood.
And now they are called the conquerer
not by killing their enemies but by suffering and
bearing witness just like the lamb.
After this the seventh and final seal is broken
but before the scroll is open the seven warning trumpets emerge
and fire is taken from the incense altar
it symbolizes the cry of the martyrs and
it's cast onto the earth bringing the day of the Lord to its completion.
The cycle of seven trumpets and the unsealed scroll
Now with the seven trumpets John backs up and he retells the story again.
This time with images from the Exodus story.
So the first five trumpet blasts replay the plague sent upon Egypt
and then the sixth trumpet releases the four horsemen
that came from the first four seals.
But then John tells us that despite all these plagues
the nations did not repent just like pharaoh didn't in the Exodus story.
So it seems that God's judgment alone will not bring people to humble repentance before him
then John pauses the action again with another intermission.
An angel brings the unsealed scroll that was opened by the lamb.
And just like Ezekiel John is told to eat the scroll and then proclaim its message to the nations.
Finally the lamb scroll is open
and now we will discover how God's kingdom will come here on earth.
The scrolls content is spelled out in two symbolic visions.
First John sees God's temple and the martyrs by the altar and
he's told to measure and set them apart.
And it's an image of protection taken from Zechariah chapter 2.
But then the outer courts in the city are excluded
and they get trampled down by the nations.
Now some think that this refers literally to
a destruction of Jerusalem that happened in the past or will happen in the future.
But more likely John's following the tradition of Jesus and the apostles
who all use the new temple as a symbol for God's new covenant people.
In that case, this is an image about how Jesus' followers may suffer persecution by the nations
but this external defeat cannot take away their victory through the lamb.
This idea gets expanded in the scrolls' second vision.
God appoints two witnesses as prophetic representatives to the nations.
And once again some people think this refers literally two prophets who will appear one day in the future.
But John calls them lampstands which is one of his clear symbols for the churches.
So this vision is more likely about the prophetic role of
Jesus' followers who are to take up the mantle of Moses and Elijah
and call idolatrous nations and rulers to turn back to the one true God.
But then all of a sudden a horrible beast appears,
let the reader remember Daniel chapter 7,
and the beast conquers the witnesses and kills them.
But then God brings them back to life
and vindicates the witnesses before their persecutors
and the end result is that many among the nations finally do repent
and give glory to the Creator God
in the day of the Lord.
Now, stop. Think about the story so far.
God's warning judgments through the seals and through the trumpets
did not generate repentance among the nations
just like the Exodus plagues only hardened Pharaoh's heart.
But the lamb, He conquered his enemies by loving them, dying for them.
And now the message of the lamb's scroll reveals the mission of his army, the church.
God's kingdom will be revealed when the nations see the church
imitating the loving sacrifice of the Lamb
not killing their enemies but dying for them.
It is God's mercy shown through Jesus' followers that will bring the nations to repentance.
And this surprising claim is the message of the open scroll
that John has placed at the exact center of the entire book.
After this the last trumpet sounds and the nations are
shaken as God's kingdom comes here on earth as it is in heaven.
So now we know how the church will bear witness to the nations and inherit the new creation
but who was that terrible beast that waged war on God's people?
And how will the whole story turn out? John will tell us in the second half of the Book of the Revelation.












We're exploring three books in the Bible known as the wisdom literature
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes and Job
and they're all asking the question what does it mean to live well in this world
So we looked at proverbs who you could think of as a bright young teacher
She's all about pursuing wisdom an attribute of God that's woven into reality
and she's optimistic that if you use wisdom you will build a successful life
Helpful info for understanding Ecclesiastes
but then we come to Ecclesiastes who's more like the sharp middle-aged critic and he says
You think using wisdom will bring you success
You'd better think again because life here under the sun is meaningless
and that's a phrase you use a lot in this book
but to understand this book we have to realize first that we're hearing two voices
So first there's the teacher and we've been calling him the critic
He's the main voice in the book
but he is introduced to us by another figure the author
and he's the one who's collected the critics words
and then at the end of the book summarizes everything and gets the final word
So why does the author wants to hear from the critic?
He wants to turn your view of the world upside down
and he's gonna let the critic explore three really disturbing things about the world
and we should warn you these are pretty intense
A person's existence is a blink in time
Yeah! So the first is the march of time
whereas the critic says
Generations come and generations go
but the earth it's been here long before us and we'll be long after
No one remembers people from long ago and all the people yet to come
They too will be forgotten by those who come after them
and so on a cosmic scale, you and I, we are just ibilik
stars are born and then they die and form planets with orbit new stars
and those planets they change over time and eventually burnt up
And admits this cosmic backdrop, my entire existence is like a blink in time
Every human is going to die
which leads to the critic's second disturbing observation
that we are all going to die
Humans face the same fate as the animals
Death, all people, the righteous and the wicked
The good and the bad
Those who offer sacrifices to God and those who do not
They all share the same destiny
all this activity and madness then we all join the dead
Man! This book is depressing
Life is random
and so is the final disturbing thing for the critic
and that is life's random nature
So in Proverbs, life isn't random
There's a clear cause-and-effect relationship between doing the right thing and being rewarded
But the fact is that life doesn't always work that way
The critic has observed a glitch in the system
He calls it, Chance, or in his words
The race doesn't always go to the Swift
nor the battle to the strong
nor does food always come to the wise
or wealth to the brilliant
or favor to the educated
time and chance happen to them all
So his point is that you can't really control anything in life
It's just way too unpredictable
so if i want to master life
then you're setting yourself up for a fall
Life is like smoke
Now throughout the book, the Critic uses a metaphor to tie together all of these disturbing ideas
Nearly 40 times he says that everything in life is "Hevel"
it's a Hebrew word that means smoke or vapor
Like smoke, life is beautiful and mysterious
It takes one shape and before you know it
It takes a new shape
and smoke look solid but try and grab it it will slip right through your fingers
and when you're stuck in the thick of it like fog, it's impossible to see clearly
Now our modern translations have lost the metaphor
and they usually translate "Hevel" as meaningless
but if you read closely the critic isn't saying that life has no meaning
but rather that its meaning is never clear
Like smoke, life is confusing
It's disorienting and uncontrollable
So what are we supposed to do with all of this?
The surprising wisdom of Ecclesiastes
Well! Surprisingly, the critic first of all acknowledges the perspective of Proverbs
He says it's a really good idea to learn wisdom and to live in the fear of the Lord
Really?! I mean he just said that doesn't guarantee success
but he knows it's the right thing to do
but secondly and more often he says that since you can't control your life
You should stop trying
Learn to hold things with an open hand because you really only have control over one thing
and that's your attitude towards the present moment
Stop worrying he says and choose to enjoy a good conversation with a friend
or the Sun on your face
or a good meal with people that you care about
The simple things in life
Yes and both the good things and the bad because both are rich gifts from God
and that's the surprising wisdom of ecclesiasticus
The proper response to the meaning of Ecclesiastes
Listening to the critic is painful
and can lead you into some dark places
and that's why the author speaks up at the end of the book
He doesn't want you to lose hope
He wants to make you humble
Into someone who trusts that life has meaning even when you can't make sense of it
that one day God will clear the Hevel and bring his justice on all that we've done
and so he tells us that the proper response to all of this is to fear the lord
and keep his Commandments
and that's the book of Ecclesiastes
Now there's one more voice in the Bible's wisdom literature
and that's the book of Job
and he will bring us the final much-needed perspective on our journey into wisdom
Hey! Thanks for watching this video
We make a lot more videos like this one here on our youtube channel
so check them out
We believe the Bible is a unified story that leads to Jesus
and has wisdom to offer the modern world
so we're making videos that explore all the books of the Bible
Their main ideas and their unique design
We're also making videos about key themes that run through hole biblical story
there's a lot more videos and series planned
And all of these Bible Project resources are possible because of your support
You can make a one-time gift
Or you could become part of our growing monthly support team
and the goal is to make this whole video library available for free to anyone anywhere
You can join us by going to jointhebibleproject.com
Download full resolution versions of these videos, posters, study guide
It's all for free there
You guys are awesome. Thanks for the support








The book of Genesis. In the first video we saw how chapters 1 through 11 set up
the basic storyline of the Bible. God has created all things and he makes humans
in His image to rule the world on his behalf. The humans choose sin and
rebellion and so the world spins out of control into violence and death all
leading up to the rebellion and scattering of the people in Babylon.
God's plan and promise to Abraham
And so the big question is what is God going to do to rescue and redeem his world?
Well out of that scattering at Babylon, the author traces the genealogy of just one
family that leads eventually to a man named Abram, later known as Abraham.
And God's promise to Abraham at the beginning of chapter 12 opens up a whole
new movement in the story. God calls Abraham to leave his home and go to the
land of Canaan which God says will become his one day. And in that land, God
promises to make Abraham into a great nation, to make his name great and bless him.
Now these promises are connected back to earlier parts of the book.
So Babylon had arrogantly tried to make a great name for itself and that didn't go
very well. But God in his generosity is going to bestow a great name on this
no-name guy, Abraham, and God's blessing of Abraham echoes all the way back to
that original blessing God gave humanity in the beginning. So the question is: "Why
is God going to blessed Abraham and his family?" And the last line of God's
promise makes this clear: "So that all the families of the earth will find God's
blessing in you." Now this is key for understanding the whole rest of the
biblical story. God's plan is to rescue and bless his rebellious world through
Abraham's family and this is why the whole rest of the Old Testament story is
just going to focus on this one family,
eventually called the people of Israel. This is also why Israel will
later be called a kingdom of priests at Mount Sinai. God wants to use them to
show all of the other nations what he's like and ultimately this is the promise
that gets picked up by the later biblical prophets and poets who say that
its fulfillment will come through Israel's messianic king,
whose reign will bring justice and peace to all of the nations. Now at this
The themes of the stories of Abraham's family
point of the story, none of that is clear.
You just have to keep reading and watch the promise develop.
And so the rest of the book focuses on Abraham and his family. First Abraham
himself, then his son Isaac and then his son Jacob and then Jacob's twelve sons.
And the stories about each generation, they're united by two main themes.
So first, each generation of Abraham's family is marked by repeated failure.
They just keep making really bad decisions that mess up their lives and
put God's promise in jeopardy.
However God remains faithful to them. He keeps rescuing them from themselves and
reaffirming his commitment to bless them and bless the nations through them
despite their failings. So the Abraham stories - God had promised Abraham huge
The Abraham stories and God's covenant promise
family - but on two different occasions he's afraid for his life because other
men are attracted to his wife and so he denies that he's even married to her,
which creates, of course, all of these problems. And not only that, Abraham and
his wife Sarah they can't have children and so Sarah arranges for Abraham to
sleep with one of their servant girls, which also creates all of these problems
in the family. But each time God bales Abraham out and in chapters 15 and 17 God
even formalizes his promise to Abraham with an official commitment called
a covenant. This is a classic scene. God invites Abraham to look up at the night
stars and to count them and he says that's how numerous your family's going to be.
And despite all of the odds - having no kids and no way to have any at the
moment, Abraham looks up in the sky and simply trusts God's promise. And God
responds by entering into a covenant with Abraham, promising that he will
become a father of many nations, that God's blessing may come to the whole world.
And then God asked Abraham to mark his family with a sign of the covenant:
circumcision of all the male boys in the family. This is a symbol to remind them
that the fruitfulness of their family is a gift from God. And so Abraham has lots
of kids eventually and he dies at a good old age.
The Jacob stories - God renames him Israel
Now the Jacob stories play out these themes even more dramatically. From birth,
Jacob lives up to the meaning of his name, which is "deceiver". He cheats his
brother Esau out of his inheritance and blessing and he does it by deceiving his old
blind father no less, and then he just takes off. He goes on to take four
wives even though he really only loves one, Rachel and this creates all of these
rivalries in the family.
The only thing that humbles Jacob is being deceived by his uncle Laban, who
cheats him out of years of his life.
The tables have finally turned. And so it's a humbled Jacob that returns to his homeland.
In a very strange story Jacob ends up wrestling with God as he demands that
God bless him. Some things never really change, do they? However, God honors his
determination and he passes Abraham's blessing on to him and he renamed Jacob
as Israel, which means "wrestles with God." Now it's this last part of the book the
The story of Jacob's sons - God subverts evil to save lives
story of Jacob sons where all the themes come to a head. Jacob loves his second to
youngest son Joseph more than any of the others and he gives him a special jacket.
And the 10 older sons come to hate Joseph and so they kidnap him and
they plan to kill him, but instead they decide to just sell him into slavery in
Egypt where he ends up in prison. Talk about family failure. But God is with
Joseph and He orchestrates Joseph's release from prison and Pharaoh ends up
elevating Joseph to second in command over all of Egypt. And so Joseph saves
the nation of Egypt during a famine and he also ends up saving his brothers and
his family from starving to death. And so once again we can see the folly and the
sin of Abraham's family is met with God's faithfulness, who subverts even the
evil of the brothers into an occasion to save life. And this is actually what
Joseph says right near the end of the book. He says to his brother's, "You planned
this for evil but God planned it for good, to save many lives." Now these words
are strategically placed at the end of the book because they summarize not only
the story of Joseph and his brothers, but the book as a whole.
Summary of the book of Genesis
From Genesis 3 onward, humans keep acting selfishly and doing evil but
this God does not going to leave his world to its own devices. He remains
faithful and determined to bless people despite their failures. You can see this
especially in how that mysterious promise about the descendant of the
woman gets developed throughout the book. So remember Genesis 3? God promised
that this wounded Victor would come and crush the snake and defeat evil at its source.
And the author then connects this promise directly to the line of Abraham.
This is a part of how God's gonna bring his blessing to the nations. Now from
Abraham this promise gets connected to Judah, the fourth son of Jacob. And this is how.
In an extremely important poem in chapter 49, an aging Jacob, he's on his
deathbed, he wants to bless his twelve sons and when he comes to Judah, Jacob
predicts that Judah will become the tribe of Israel's royal leaders and that
one day a king will come who will command the obedience of all the nations
and fulfill God's promise to restore the garden blessing to all of the world.
And then after this Jacob dies and later Joseph dies too. So the growing family
remains in Egypt and so the book of Genesis ends with all of these future
hopes and promises left hanging and undeveloped. And it forces you to turn
the page to see how it's all going to turn out. But for now that's the book of Genesis.










If you have ever heard the phrase "the Holy Spirit"
and you want to know what it means,
where do you start?
Well, you have to start on page one of the Bible.
Where the uncreated world is depicted as this
dark chaotic place. But then, above the chaos
God's Spirit is there, hovering, ready to bring about life and order and beauty.
Okay, but what is God's Spirit?
Yeah, so the Spirit is the way the Biblical authors
talk about God's personal presence.
The Hebrew word is Ruakh.
Ruu-a-achh? Yeah, you've gotta clear your throat at the end.
So, what is it?
Ruakh can refer to a number of different things,
but what they all have in common is energy.
Energy? How so?
So, there's an invisible energy,
that makes the clouds move or the tree branches sway.
Right, wind. So in Hebrew,
that's Ruakh. Okay!
Now, take a big breath, uwwshh!
So you feel that, inside you.
Yeah, the air?
Well, specifically the energy,
right, the vitality in your body that you get from
breathing, deeply,
that too is, Ruakh.
And this is the same word
used in the Bible, to describe God's
personal presence.
Just like wind and breath are invisible,
God's spirit, is invisible.
Wind is powerful, and so God's spirit is powerful.
And just as breath keeps us alive
so God's spirit sustains all of life.
Yeah! Ruakh.
Now,
as we continue on in the story of the Bible
We see God's ruakh giving special empowerment to people for specific tasks.
The first person in the Bible that happens to
is Joseph
God's spirit enables him to understand and interpret dreams.
And then it happens to this guy named "Betsaleel" and he's an artist!
God's spirit empowers him with wisdom and skills.
He's given creative genius to make beautiful things in the tabernacle.
And we also see God's ruakh empower a group of people called "the prophets".
They're able to see what's happening in history from God's point of view.
That's exactly right!
And here's the problem as the prophet saw it.
While God's ruakh had created a really good world
humans have given in to evil.
They've unleashed chaos into it through their injustice.
A new type of disorder.
Yes.
And the prophet said the spirit would come,
just like in Genesis 1,
but now, to transform the human heart,
to empower people to truly love God and others.
How will this new active God spirit happen?
Well, centuries past and we're introduced to Jesus.
And at the beginning of his mission,
there's a beautiful scene where Jesus is being baptized in the waters of the Jordan river.
Yeah, the sky opens up and God's spirit comes and rests on him like a bird.
The story is saying that God's spirit is empowering Jesus to begin the new creation.
And we see this happening when he heals people or forgives their sins.
He's creating life where there once was death.
Now, Israel's religious leaders oppose Jesus and they eventually have him killed.
But even here, God's spirit is at work.
The earliest disciples of Jesus who saw him alive from the dead
said it was God's energizing spirit that raised Jesus.
This is the beginning of new creation.
Yes, and it is still going.
When Jesus appeared to his closest followers,
he breathed on them and said "Receive the Holy Spirit."
And soon after that, the Spirit powerfully comes on all of his disciples.
So that they can become a part of this new creation
and share the good news and learn how to live by the energy and influence of God's spirit.
And so today, the spirit is still hovering in dark places.
Yes, pointing people to Jesus,
transforming and empowering them so they can love God and others.
And the Christian hope is that the Spirit is going to finish the job.
The story of the Bible ends with a vision of a new humanity
living in a new world that's permeated with God's love and life-giving spirit.




The book of Job. It's a profound and very unique book in the Bible for lots of
reasons. The story is set in a very obscure land that's far away from Israel, Uz.
The main character, Job, he's not even an Israelite. And the author, who's anonymous,
doesn't even set the story in any clear period of ancient history. This all seems
intentional though. It's like the author doesn't want us to be distracted by
historical questions but rather to focus simply on the story of Job and on the
questions raised by his experience of suffering. The book of Job has a very
clear literary design. It opens and closes with a short narrative prologue
and then epilogue. And then the central body of the book is dense Hebrew poetry,
representing conversations between Job and four dialogue partners called "the
friends." These conversations are then concluded by a series of poetic speeches
given by God to Job. Let's dive in to see how it works together. The prologue
introduces us to Job and we're told that he's the blameless, upright man who
honors God. He's a super good guy. And then all of a sudden were transported
into the heavenly realms and God is holding court with his staff team. It's a
very common image in the Old Testament describing how God runs the world. And
among the heavenly beings is a figure called "the Satan," which in hebrew
means "the Accuser" or "the Prosecutor." It's like we're watching a court scene.
God presents Job as a truly righteous man and then the accuser challenges
God's policy of rewarding righteous people like Job. He says the only reason Job
obeys you is because you bless him with prosperity. Let Job suffer-- then we'll
see how righteous he actually is. And then God agrees to let the accuser inflict
suffering on Job. Now it's at this point in the story that most of us go, "What? Why
did God do that?" and then we assume that this book is going to answer that
question--why God allows good people to suffer. But as you read on, the book
doesn't answer that question. Nothing in the book ever answers that question.
The prologue is setting up the real questions this book is trying to get at.
Questions about God's justice and whether God operates the universe
according to the strict principle of justice. And the response to those
questions comes as you read through to the end of the book, not at the beginning.
The ultimate reason for Job suffering is simply never revealed. So the prologue
concludes with a suffering and bewildered Job who's rebuked by his wife
and he's approached by three friends who are going to try and provide wisdom and
counsel. Their names are Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite.
They are all non-Israelites, like Job.
And they represent the best of ancient Near Eastern thinking
about God and suffering in the human condition. And this moves into the main
part of the book. First Job speaks. This is how this section of the book works:
first, Job is going to speak and then will follow a response from a friend.
Then Job will respond to that friend and then another friend will respond to Job's
response and so on, back and forth for three cycles. And this whole
debate has focused on three questions: "Is God truly just in character?" and "Does God
run the universe on the strict principle of justice?" And if so, then how is Job's
suffering to be explained? As we're going to see, Job and the friends, they're
working from a huge assumption about what God's justice ought to look like in
the world, namely that every single thing that happens in the universe should
operate according to the strict principle of justice. So if you're a wise,
good person and you honor God, good things will happen to you. God will
reward you. But if you're evil and stupid and do sinful things, bad things will
happen to you. God will punish you. Now Job's constant arguments throughout his
speeches is this: first of all, that he's innocent and so the implication of that
is that his suffering is not a divine punishment. Now we know from the prologue,
both of these things are true. Remember, God Himself said Job is righteous and
blameless. And so Job concludes his argument by accusing God. God either doesn't run
the world according to justice, or even worse, God Himself is simply unjust. The
friends, on the other hand, they beg to differ.
Their argument is that God is just. The implication being that God always runs
the world according to justice in this way and so they conclude by accusing not
God, but Job. Job must have done something really, really bad for God to
punish him like this. They even start making up possible sins that Job must
have committed. Job protests all of this. In fact, he gets so fed up with the
friends that he eventually just gives up on them. He takes up his case directly
with God. Now something to be aware of is that Job, he's on an emotional roller
coaster in these poems. He used to think that God is just, but now he can't
reconcile that with his suffering. And so, in some outbursts Job will accuse God
of being a bully. Once he even declares that God has orchestrated all the injustice
in the world. But the moment he utters that thought, he's terrified of it because he
wants to hope and believe that God is truly just. Job is all over the place in
this section. And so he makes one last statement of his innocence and then he
demands that God show up personally to explain himself. Now it's at this point
that a surprise friend shows up,
Elihu the Buzite. Now, he's not an Israelite but he does have a Hebrew name.
And Elihu has the same assumption as Job and the friends. . He argues that God
is just and that that implies that God always operates the universe according
to justice. But then Elihu draws a more sophisticated conclusion about why good
people suffer. It may not be punishment for sin in the past.
God might inflict suffering as a warning to help people avoid sin in the future. Or
God might use pain and suffering to build character or to teach people valuable
lessons. Elihu doesn't claim to know why Job is suffering but one thing he is certain
of: Job is wrong to accuse God of being unjust. Job doesn't even respond to Elihu and
the dialogues come to a close . It's like the wisdom of the Ancients has been
spent and the mystery remains. And then all of a sudden God shows up in a
whirlwind and he responds to Job personally. He first responds to Job's
accusation that he is unjust and incompetent at running the universe. So
God takes Job on a virtual tour of the universe and he starts asking him all these
questions about the order and origins of the cosmos. Was Job ever around when God
architected the earth or organized the constellations? Has Job ever commanded
the sunrise or controlled the weather?
God has his eyes on all of these cosmic details that Job has never even
conceived of. Then God starts going into detail describing the grazing habits of
mountain goats and how deer give birth, or the feeding patterns of lions and
wild donkeys. What's the point of all this? Remember the assumption of Job and
his friends about what it looks like for God to run the world according to
justice.
Underneath that assumption is a deeper one that Job and his friends have a wide
enough perspective on life to make such a claim about how God ought to run the world.
And God's response with this virtual tour, it deconstructs all of these assumptions.
It first of all shows that the universe is a vast, complex place and
that God has his eyes on all of it--every detail. Job on the other hand, has only
the small horizon of his life experience to draw from. His view of the world is
very limited and so what looks like divine injustice from Job's point of
view needs to be seen in an infinitely larger context. Job is simply not in a
position to make such a huge accusation about God. After the virtual tour, God
asks Job if he would like to micromanage the world for a day according to the
strict principle of justice that Job and his friends assume; punishing every evil deed of
every person at every moment with precise retribution.
The fact is that carrying out justice in a world like ours, it's extremely complex.
It's never black and white like Job and the friends seem to think. Which leads to
God's last point. He starts describing these two fantastic creatures, Behemoth
and Leviathan, which some people think are poetic depictions of the hippo and
crocodile. More likely they refer to well-known creatures from ancient Near
Eastern mythology that are used elsewhere in the Bible as symbols of the
disorder and danger that exists in God's good world. These creatures, they're not
evil. God is actually quite proud of them. But they're not safe either. The point is
that God's world is amazing
and very good but it's not perfect or always safe. God's world has order and
beauty but it's also wild and sometimes dangerous, just like these two
fantastic creatures. And so we come back to the big question of Job's suffering.
Why is there suffering in God's world-- whether it's from earthquakes or wild
animals or from other humans. God doesn't explain why. What he says is that
we live in an extremely complex, amazing world that at this stage at least is not
designed to prevent suffering. And that's God's response. Job challenged God's
justice. God responds that Job doesn't have sufficient knowledge about our
universe to make such a claim.
Job demanded a full explanation from God and what God asked Job for is trust
in His wisdom and character. And so, Job responds with humility and repentance. He
apologizes for accusing God and he acknowledges that he's overstepped his
bounds. Then all of a sudden the book concludes with a short epilogue. First
God says that the friends were wrong, that their ideas about God's justice
were just too simple-- not true to the complexity of the world or God's wisdom.
And then God says that Job has spoken rightly about him. Now this is surprising
because it can't apply to everything
Job said. I mean we know Job drew hasty and wrong conclusions, but God still
approves of Job's wrestling. How Job came honestly before God with all of his
emotion and pain and simply wanted to talk to God himself. And God says that's
the right way to process through all of this, through the struggle of prayer. The book
concludes with Job having his health, his family, his wealth,
all restored-- not as a reward for good behavior but simply as a generous gift
from God. And that's the end of the book. The book of Job, it doesn't unlock the
puzzle of why bad things happen to good people. Rather it does invite us to trust
God's wisdom when we do encounter suffering rather than try and figure out
the reason for it. When we search for reasons we tend to either simplify
God--like the friends-- or like Job, accuse God, but based on limited
evidence. And so the book is inviting us to honestly bring our pain and our grief to God and
to trust that God actually cares and that he knows what he's doing. And that's
what the book of Job is all about.









The book of Joshua.
Let's back up and remember the story so far,
So God chose Abraham and then his family became the people of Israel,
who are then enslaved down in Egypt.
So through Moses, God rescued Israel out of Egypt,
he made a covenant with them at Mount Sinai
and he brought them through the wilderness.
So Israel then camped outside the promised land
and Moses called them to obey Gods commands
so that they could show all the other nations what God is like.
The book of Joshua picks up right after Moses has died
and Israel is ready to enter the land.
So the story of Joshua is designed with four main movements.
Joshua first leads Israel into the promised land,
and then once they are there, they meet all this hostility from the Canaanites
and so they engage them in battle,
then after their victory Joshua divides up the promised land
as the inheritance for the twelve tribes
and then the book concludes with these final speeches that Joshua gives to the people.
So lets dive in and we will see how all of it flows together.
The first section begins with Moses death
and Joshua is appointed as Israels new leader,
and the author intentionally presents Joshua as a new Moses,
so like Moses, Joshua calls the people to obey the Torah,
which means the covenant commands that they were given at Mount Sinai,
and then Joshua sends spies into the land
just as Moses did back in Numbers chapters 13 and 14
except it goes way better this time.
In fact, some Canaanites turn and follow the God of Israel,
Joshua then leads all Israel across the Jordan river and into the land.
Just like the sea parted for Moses in the Exodus
so here the river Jordan parts
and the priests carry the Ark of the Covenant across
leading all Israel with them.
Now, in chapter 5 the story transitions,
so the people look back to their roots as Gods covenant people
and so the new generation is circumcised
and they celebrate their first Passover in the land.
But then, they turn prepared to go forward
and Joshua has this crazy encounter with a mysterious warrior,
who, it turns out is the angelic commander of Gods army,
and Joshua asks, Are you for us? Or are you for our enemies?
The warrior responds, Neither.
Which shows that the real question here
is whether Joshua is on Gods side.
It makes clear that this whole story is not about Israel versus the Canaanites,
rather this is Gods battle,
and Israel is going to play the role of spectators or sometimes supporters in Gods plan.
Which leads to the next section.
We find stories about all these conflicts that Israel has with different Canaanite groups,
and the first part retells the story of two battles in detail
and that is followed by a series of short stories
that condense years of battles into a few brief summaries.
So the first two battles are against Jericho and then Ai,
and they offer these contrasting portraits of Gods faithfulness versus Israels failure.
At Jericho, Israel is to take a completely passive approach,
so they let Gods presence in the Ark lead them around the city to music for six days
and just like Rahab turned to the God of Israel
maybe the people of Jericho would do the same, but they don't,
and so on the seventh day the priests blow the trumpets
and the walls come falling down leading Israel to victory.
The point of the story is that God is the one who will deliver his people;
Israel simply needs to trust and wait.
Now the next story, of the battle of Ai makes the opposite point.
So there is this Israelite named Achan,
and he steals from Jericho some of the devoted goods that were to belong to God alone
and then he lies about it.
Its a pretty lame move after all that God has done for Israel,
and so Israel goes into battle with the city of Ai
and they are totally defeated,
and its only after humble repentance
and severely dealing with Achans sin that Israel gains victory.
And so together these two stories are placed right up front to make an important point.
If Israel is going to inherit the land,
they have to be obedient and trust in Gods commands.
They dont get special treatment.
Now the second part of the section begins with the Gibeonites, a Canaanite people group
and they do just as Rahab did as they turn to follow the God of Israel
and they make peace with Israel.
This is in contrast to all these other Canaanite kings
who start to form alliances and coalitions and they want to destroy Israel.
So Israel engages them in battle and they win by a land slide.
So this whole section concludes with this summary list
of all of these victories won by Moses and then by Joshua.
Now, lets stop for a second because odds are
that these stories and the violence in them, they are going to bother you,
and if you are a follower of Jesus, youre bound to wonder, like,
didnt Jesus said to love your enemies?
Why is God declaring war here?
So first, why the Canaanites?
The main reasons are actually given earlier in the biblical story
is that the culture of the Canaanites had become extremely morally corrupt,
especially when it comes to sex,
go check out Leviticus chapter 18,
and they also widely practiced child sacrifice,
go see Deuteronomy chapter 12,
and so God didnt want these practices to influence Israel,
the Canaanites had to go.
Which raises the second question.
Did God actually command the destruction of all the Canaanites, like a genocide?
So at first glance, you know, you look at the phrases used in these stories.
They totally destroyed them, they left no survivor or anything that breathed,
but when you look a second time more closely,
youll see that these phrases are clearly hyperbole and not literal.
So go back to the original command about the Canaanites in Deuteronomy chapter 7.
Israel is first told to drive out the Canaanites,
but then to totally destroy them
and then that is followed by commands to not intermarry with them
or enter into business deals with them.
So you cant marry someone that youve destroyed.
I think you get the point.
The same idea applies to the stories in Joshua, look closely.
So for example, were told in Joshua chapter 10
that Israel left no survivors in the cities of Hebron or Debir,
but then later in chapter 15 we see these towns
and theyre still populated by Canaanites,
and so what were seeing is that Joshua fits in with other ancient battle accounts
by using non-literal hyperbolic language as part of the narrative style.
And so the word genocide doesnt actually fit what we see here.
Especially in light of the stories about the Canaanites who did turn to the God of Israel,
like Rahab or the Gibeonites, God was open to those who would turn to him.
The last thing to think about is that these stories mark a unique moment in Israels history.
These battles were limited to the handful of people groups living in the land of Canaan.
With all other nations, Israel was commanded by God to pursue peace,
go read Deuteronomy chapter 20.
So the purpose of these battle stories was never to tell you, the reader,
to go commit violence in Gods name.
Rather, they show God bringing his justice
on human evil at a unique moment in history,
and how he delivered Israel from being annihilated by the Canaanites.
Now, lets go back to the books design.
After years of battles we see an aging Joshua
and he starts dividing up the land for the twelve tribes of Israel,
and most of this section is like lists of boundary lines,
and let us be honest, its kind of boring.
Its like reading a map that has no pictures.
But for the Israelites these lists were super important.
This was the fulfillment of Gods ancient promises to Abraham
that his descendants would inherit the promised land.
. And so now it was all coming to pass right down to the detail,
which leads to the final section.
Joshua gives two speeches to the people
theyre very similar to the final speeches of Moses in Deuteronomy.
Joshua reminds them of Gods generosity,
how he brought them into the land and rescued them from the Canaanites.
And so, he calls them to turn away from the Canaanite gods
and be faithful to the covenant they made.
If they do, it will lead to life and blessing in the land,
but if theyre unfaithful,
Israel will call down on itself the same divine judgement that the Canaanites experienced.
Theyll be kicked off the land into exile,
and so Joshua leaves Israel with a choice.
What is Israel going to do?
Thats the big question that looms as the story ends.
And thats the book of Joshua.













>> Jon: The first book of the Bible is a book you have probably heard of, it's called Genesis.
>> Tim: Genesis comes from a Hebrew word, it's pronounced rasheet.
It just means beginning.
>> Jon: Now there's a lot of stories from the book of Genesis,
and it's easy to just pull out a specific story
and try to tell you what it might mean. But we think the best way to understand this
book, is to look at the book as a whole
and show you how the whole thing is designed.
>> Tim: The book is designed to fall into two main parts.
You have chapters 1-11, which is telling the story of God and the whole world
and then you have the second part which is about God and Abraham's family
as chapters 12-50, and how the two of those parts relate,
that's where you find the message of the book.
The creation story
>> Jon: OK, so lets start back at the beginning. The first part of Genesis begins with the
creation story where God creates everything
>> Tim: And how exactly that happens of course that's where all the debates come. But,
He takes a dark watery chaos and He turns it into a beautiful garden where humans can
flourish.
>> Jon: That sounds nice.
>> Tim: That does sound nice. In fact seven different times God says of all that He's
Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden
made that it's good
>> Jon: And this is where we meet the first human characters in the Bible, Adam and Eve.
>> Tim: They're both individual characters but also representative. Adam is the Hebrew
word for humanity and Eve is the Hebrew word for life and God creates them in his image,
in other words, Humanity reflects or is meant to reflect the creativity, the goodness, and
character of the creator out into the world that He's made. And they're supposed to reproduce,
and make cultures, and neighborhoods, and art, and gardens, and everything else. But,
The core biblical explanation of sin
He gives them a moral choice about how they are going to build this world. And this is
what the tree of the "Knowledge of Good and Evil" is all about.
>> Jon: And He tells them, "don't eat of this tree or you will die." What's that
all about?
>> Tim: Up till now God has been defining and providing what is good.  And so God is
the one with the knowledge of good and evil.  But this tree represents a choice:  will
the human's trust God's definition of good and evil, or are they going to seize
the opportunity to try and define good and evil for themselves.
>> Jon: And Adam and Eve eat the fruit.
>> Tim: This is the core, biblical explanation for that concept of sin, that desire to call
the shots myself its the inward turn of the human heart to do what's good for me and
my tribe even if it's at the expense of you and your tribe.
Humanity's choice and the consequences
>> Jon: And the problem is humans are horrible at defining good and evil without God and
so now that Humanity's made this choice, things get really...
>> Tim: ...really bad. So Genesis 3 through 11 is like tracing this downward spiral of
all Humanity. So adam and eve, they can't trust each other anymore. and so theres a
little story about how they were naked and felt fine about it beforehand, but now they
feel shameful because all the sudden Adam's definition of good and evil might be different
than Eve's. And so they hide from each other.
>> Jon: And there's another story of temptation. Cain is jealous of his brother Abel, and he
gives in and kills him.
>> Tim: there's a story right after Cain about a guy named Lamech. All we know about
Lamech is that he accumulates wives like property and he sings songs about he's a more violent
vengeful person than Cain ever was and he's proud of it.
Noah's flood
>> Jon: Things get so bad with the human race, that we see God decide to just wipe us out.
>> Tim: Yeah, we typically think of the flood story as about God being angry, but it actually
begins with God's sadness and grief about the state of his world. So out of the passion
to preserve the goodness of his world, He washes it clean with the flood.
>> Jon: But there's a glimmer of hope. He chooses Noah and his whole family and saves
them on this boat.
>> Tim: Don't forget about the animals
>> Jon: Right. And the animals. So Noah and his family are going to reboot all of Humanity.
He must be a pretty great guy.
>> Tim: But this is the story most people don't know because it's kind of weird.
Noah gets off the boat, and plants a vineyard, and gets totally plastered, and then something
sketchy happens in his tent with his son. It's a tragic story.
The Tower of Babel
>> Jon: So from here, Humanity grows again and things are as bad as before.  And the
last story is the famous story of the Tower of Babel.
>> Tim: In this story you have all of the nations uniting together to use this new technology
they have: the brick. They want to make a name for themselves, build a big city with
this huge tower that will reach up to the gods. But God knows that this city will be
a nightmare, so in His mercy, He scatters them. All of these stories underline the same
basic idea: when humans seize autonomy from God and define good for themselves, it results
in a world of tragedy, and death.
>> Jon: And all of this leaves you wondering, is there any hope for humanity.
>> Tim: Yes, yeah there is. It's the very next story that answers that question; it's
the beginning of God's mission to rescue and restore his world.








The book of the prophet Isaiah. Isaiah lived in Jerusalem in the latter half of
Israel's Kingdom period and he spoke on God's behalf to the leaders of Jerusalem
and Judah. He spoke first of all a message of God's judgment; he warned
Israel's corrupt leaders that their rebellion against their covenant with
God would come at a cost, that God was going to use the great empires of
Assyria and after them Babylon to judge Jerusalem if they persisted in idolatry
and oppression of the poor, but that announcement was combined with a
message of hope. Isaiah believed deeply that God would one day fulfill all of
his covenant promises: that he would send a king from David's line to establish
God's kingdom (remember 2nd Samuel 7), that he would lead Israel in obedience
to all of the laws of the Covenant made at Mount Sinai (remember Exodus chapter 19),
and all of this was so that God's blessing and salvation would flow
outward to all of the nations like God promised to Abraham in Genesis chapter 12,
and it's this hope that compelled Isaiah to speak out against the
corruption and idolatry of Israel in his day. Now the book has a pretty complex literary
The literary design of the book of Isaiah
design, but there's one simple way to see how it all fits together: chapters 1 through 39
contain three large sections that develop Isaiah's warning of judgment on
Israel, and it all culminates in an event pointed to at the end of chapter 39 - the
fall of Jerusalem and the exile of the people to Babylon - but in chapters 1 to 39
there's also a message of hope that after the exile God's covenant promises
would all be fulfilled, and chapters 40 to 66 pick up that promise of hope and
develops it further. In this video we're just gonna focus on chapters 1 to 39. The
Isaiah's vision of judgment and hope for Jerusalem
first main section focuses on Isaiah's vision of judgment and hope for
Jerusalem, and it begins as Isaiah accuses the city's leaders of Covenant rebellion,
idolatry, injustice, and God says he's going to judge the city by sending the
nations to conquer Israel. Isaiah says that this will be like a purifying fire
that burns away all that's worthless in Israel in order to create a new
Jerusalem that's populated by a remnant that has repented and turned back to God
and Isaiah says that that's when God's kingdom will come and all nations will
come to the temple in Jerusalem and learn
of God's justice, bringing about a age of universal peace and harmony. Now
it's this basic storyline of the old Jerusalem, purifying judgment into the
New Jerusalem, this is going to get repeated over and over throughout the
book getting filled in with increasing detail. So, at the center of this section
Isaiah's temple vision
is Isaiah's grand vision of God sitting on his throne in the temple and he's
surrounded by these heavenly creatures that are shouting that God is holy holy
holy, and Isaiah suddenly realizes just how corrupt he and his people Israel are,
and he's certain that he's going to be destroyed by God's holiness, but he's not.
God holiness in the form of this burning coal comes and burns him, but not to destroy,
rather it purifies him from his sin. And as Isaiah ponders this strange experience
God commissions him with a very difficult task: he is to keep announcing
this coming judgment, but because Israel has reached a point of no return his
warnings are going to have a paradoxical effect of hardening the people. But Isaiah
is to trust God's plan. Israel is going to be chopped down like a tree and
left like a stump in a field, and that stump will itself be scorched and burned
but after all of that burning God says that this smoldering stump is a holy
seed that will survive into the future. It's a small sign of hope but who or
what is that Holy Seed? The rest of this section offers an answer. Isaiah
Isaiah prophecies a coming king named "Immanuel"
confronts Ahaz, a descendant of David and a King of Jerusalem, and he announces
his downfall. God says that it's the great empire of Assyria who will first
chop Israel down and devastate the land, but there's hope. Because of God's promise to
David he's going to send after this destruction a new king named
Emmanuel, which means "God with us", and Emanuel's Kingdom is going to set God's
people free from violent oppressive empires, and Isaiah describes this coming
king as a small shoot of new growth that will emerge from the old stump of David's
family. It's this king that's the holy seed from chapter six, and the king is
going to be empowered by God's Spirit to
rule over a new Jerusalem and bring justice for the poor and all nations
will look to this messianic king for guidance.
His kingdom will transform all creation bringing peace. Now you finish chapters
Isaiah sees Babylon destroying Israel
1 through 12 with pretty good understanding of Isaiah's message of
judgment and hope, but when will this all happen? Isaiah saw another Empire arising
after Assyria, and thats Babylon, who would also attack Jerusalem and
actually succeed in destroying it, and that brings us in the next sections of
Poems that explore God's judgment and hope
the book. So first we have a large collection of poems that explore God's
judgment and hope for the nations. We learn first of all of the fall of
Babylon and Israel's neighbors. Isaiah could see that a serious world power
would one day be replaced by the empire of Babylon, a nation even more
destructive an arrogant. Babylon's kings claimed that they were higher than all
other gods and so God vows to bring Babylon down. And not only Babylon, Isaiah
goes on to list Israel's neighbors accusing them all of the same kind of
pride and injustice, and he predicts their ultimate ruin. But remember for Isaiah
God's judgment is never the final word for Israel or the nations, and that
leads into the next section with a series of poems that tell a tale of two
cities. There's the lofty city that has exalted itself above God and become
corrupt and unjust. This city is an archetype of rebellious humanity and is
described with language that's all borrowed from Isaiah's earlier
descriptions of Jerusalem and Assyria and Babylon all put together. This city
is destined for ruin and one day is going to be replaced by the New
Jerusalem where God reigns as king over a redeemed humanity from all nations and
there's no more death or suffering. These chapters are the climax to this section
and it shows how Isaiah's message pointed far beyond his own day, it was a message
for all who are waiting for God to bring his justice on violent oppressive
kingdoms and bring his kingdom of justice and peace and healing love. The
The rise and fall of Jerusalem
following section return the focus to the rise and fall of Jerusalem, and first
we find a whole bunch of poems where Isaiah accuses Jerusalem's leaders for turning to Egypt
for military protection
against Assyria. He knows this will backfire and Isaiah says that only
trust in their God and repentance can save Israel now, which gets illustrated
by the following story about the rise of Hezekiah, king of Jerusalem. Just as Isaiah
predicted, the Assyrian armies come and try to attack the city and so Hezekiah
humbles himself before God and he prays for divine deliverance and the
city is miraculously saved overnight, but Hezekiah's rise is immediately
followed by his fall. So he hosts a delegation from Babylon and he tries to
impress them by showing everything in Jerusalem's treasury and temple and
palaces, it's clearly an effort to make another political alliance for
protection. Isaiah hears about this and he confronts Hezekiah for his foolishness.
He predicts that this ally will one day betray him and return as an enemy to
conquer Jerusalem, and we know from 2nd Kings chapters 24 and 25 that Isaiah
was right. Over a hundred years later Babylon would turn on Jerusalem, come and
destroy the city, its temple, and carry the Israelites away to exile in Babylon.
Review of Isaiah 1-39
And so all of Isaiah's warnings of divine judgment in chapters 1 to 39 lead
up to this moment. He's shown to be a true prophet because it all came to pass
like he said. But remember the purpose of God's judgment was to purify Jerusalem
and bring the holy seed and messianic Kingdom over all nations, and it's that
hope that gets explored in the next part of the book, but for now that's what
Isaiah chapters 1 to 39 are all about.


















The book of Exodus. It's the second book of the Bible and it picks up the storyline
from the previous book, Genesis, which ended with Abraham's grandson
Jacob leading his large family of seventy people down to Egypt.
Now Jacob's eleventh son Joseph had been elevated to second in command over Egypt
and he had saved his whole family in a famine. And so Pharaoh the king of
Egypt offered the family to come live there as a safe haven. And so eventually
Jacob dies there in Egypt and Joseph and all his brothers do too. About 400 years
pass and the story of the Exodus begins. Now that name refers to the event
The Exodus
that takes place in the first half of the book--Israel's exodus from Egypt, but the book
has a second half that takes place at the foot of Mount Sinai. In this video
we'll just focus on the first half, where centuries have passed and the Israelites
were fruitful and multiplied and they filled the land. Now this line is a
deliberate echo back to the blessing that God gave all humanity back in the
Garden of Eden. And it reminds us of the big biblical story so far. Humanity
forfeited God's blessing through sin and rebellion and so God chose Abraham's
family as the vehicle through which he would restore his blessing to all the
world. But the new Pharaoh does not view Israel as a blessing. He actually thinks
this growing Israelite immigrant group is a threat to his power. And so just as in
Genesis, humanity rebells against God's blessing, so here
Pharaoh attempts to destroy the source of God's blessing, the Israelites. He
brutally enslaves them in forced labor and then he orders that all the
Israelite boys be drowned in the Nile River. Now Pharaoh, he is the worst character
in the Bible so far. His kingdom epitomizes humanity's rebellion against
God. Pharaoh has so redefined good and evil according to his own interests that even
the murder of innocent children has become good to him. And so Egypt has
become worse than Babylon from the book of Genesis and so now Israel cries out
for help against this new Babylon and God responds.
God first turns Pharaoh's evil upside down, as an Israelite mother throws her boy
into the Nile River but in a basket. And so he floats safely right down into
Pharaoh's own family. He's named Moses and he grows up to eventually become the man that
God will use to defeat Pharaoh's evil. In the famous story of the burning bush, God appears to
Moses and commissions him to go to Pharaoh and order him to release the
Israelites. And God says that he knows Pharaoh will resist and so he will bring
his judgment on Egypt in the form of plagues. Then God also says that he will
harden Pharaoh's heart. And so we're introduced into the next main part of
Confrontation
the story--the confrontation between God and Pharaoh. Now what does this mean that
God says he will harden Pharaoh's heart? It's super important to read this section of
the story really closely in its sequence. In Moses and Pharaoh's first encounter
we're told simply that Pharaoh's heart grew hard. There's no implication that
God did anything. And so in response God sends the first set of 5 plagues, each
one confronting Pharaoh and one of his Egyptian gods. And each time
Moses offers a chance for Pharaoh to humble himself and to let the Israelites go but
after each plague we're told that Pharaoh either hardened his heart or that his
heart grew hard. He's doing this of his own will and so eventually it's with the
second set of 5 plagues that we begin to hear how God hardened Pharaoh's heart. So the point
of the story seems to be this: even though God knew that Pharaoh would resist
his will, God still offered him all these chances to do the right thing. But
eventually Pharaoh's evil reaches a point of no return-- I mean even his own
advisers think that he has lost his mind. And it's at that point that God takes over
and bends Pharaoh's evil towards his own redemptive purposes. God lures Pharaoh
into his own destruction as he saves his people, which is what happens next. With
the final plague, it's the night of Passover. And God turns the tables on Pharaoh. Just
as he killed the sons of the Israelites, so God will kill the first born in
Egypt with a final
plague. But unlike Pharaoh, God provides a means of escape through the blood of
the Lamb. And here the story stops and introduces us in detail to the annual
Israelite ritual of Passover. On the night before Israel left Egypt, they
sacrificed a young, spotless lamb and painted its blood on the door frame of
their house. And when the divine plague came over Egypt, the houses covered
with the blood of the Lamb were passed over, and the son spared. And so every year
since, the Israelites have reenacted that night to remember and celebrate God's
justice and his mercy. But Pharaoh, because of his pride and rebellion, he
loses his own son and he's compelled to finally let the Israelites go free. And
so the Israelite slaves make their exodus from Egypt, but no sooner did they
leave than Pharaoh changes his mind and he gathers his army and chases after the
Israelites for a final showdown. As the Israelites pass through the waters of
the sea safely, Pharaoh charges towards his own destruction. The Exodus story
concludes with the first song of praise in the Bible. It's called the Song of the
Sea and the final line declares that the Lord reigns as king. And then the song
retells in poetry what the story of God's kingdom is all about. It's about how
God is on a mission to confront evil in his world and to redeem those who are
enslaved to evil. God is going to bring his people into the Promised Land where
his divine presence will live among them. This story is what it looks like when
God becomes king over his people. So after the Israelites sing their song, the
story takes a sharp turn. The Israelites-- they're trekking through the wilderness on
their way to Mount Sinai and they're hungry, they're thirsty, and they start
criticizing Moses and God for even rescuing them. They say they long for the good old
days in Egypt. I mean, it's crazy. So God graciously provides food and water for
Israel in the wilderness, but these stories, they cast a dark shadow and we
begin to wonder, "Could it be that Israel's heart is just as hard as
Pharaoh's?" We shall see, but for now that's the first half of the book of Exodus.













- [Tim] The Bible.
It's one of the most influential books in human history.
- [Jon] It explores the big questions of why we exist.
It's inspired many people to do amazing things.
- [Jon] And confused many others.
- [Tim] And you've probably got one
sitting around somewhere.
- [Jon] So what is the Bible, actually?
Where the Bible came from
- [Tim] Well, the Bible is a small library of books
that all emerged out of the history
of the people of ancient Israel.
And in one sense,
they were just like any other ancient civilization,
but among them were a long line
of individuals called prophets,
and they viewed Israel's story as anything but ordinary.
They saw it as a central part
of what God was doing for all humanity.
And these prophets were literary geniuses.
- [Jon] Really?
- [Tim] Yeah.
They expertly crafted the Hebrew language to
write epic narratives, very sophisticated poetry.
They were masters of metaphor and storytelling,
and they leveraged all of this
to explore life's most complicated questions about death
and life and the human struggle.
- [Jon] So there's a lot of different authors
writing this book.
- [Tim] Yeah. And these texts were produced
over a thousand year period
starting with Israel's origins in Egypt
then leading up to their kingdom with their first temple.
But eventually they were conquered
by the Babylonians, who took them away into exile.
Then at a crucial moment in their history,
many Israelites returned to their land.
They built a second temple,
they reformed their identity,
and this is when the Jewish Scriptures begin to be formed
into the shape that we have them today.
- [Jon] Okay.
What's in the Jewish Bible
The Jewish Bible, what's in it?
- [Tim] Well, in Hebrew
it's called by an acronym: TaNaK.
The T stands for Torah, sometimes called the Law.
That's Israel's five-book foundation story.
The N stands for Nevi'im,
the Hebrew word for "prophets."
And this section consists
of the historical books that tell Israel's story
from the prophets' point of view,
then you get the poetic books of the prophets themselves.
The K stands for Ketuvim,
the Hebrew word for "writings."
This is a diverse collection
of poetic books, wisdom books, and more narrative.
And the Jewish people believe that through all
of these literary works God speaks to his people.
- [Jon] Now there were other Jewish writings
being produced during this Second Temple period as well.
- [Tim] Yeah, a really diverse group of texts.
And these too were highly valued in Jewish communities.
And there was debate from ancient times
about whether or not some of these should
be considered part of their Scriptures.
The epic story of the Old Testament
- [Jon] So this is a lot
of different writings over a long period of time.
Why did they put 'em all together like this?
- [Tim] Well, together
these texts tell an epic story
about how God is working through these people to bring order
and beauty out of the chaos of our world.
And it all builds up to a hope
for a new leader who would come and renew all creation.
And then the TaNaK concludes
and this leader never comes.
- [Jon] So it's an expertly crafted work,
but it's missing an ending?
Jesus carries the story forward
- [Tim] That's exactly right.
Now, a few centuries later a Jewish prophet comes on
to the scene named Jesus of Nazareth.
He claimed he was carrying the TaNaK story forward.
- [Jon] Yeah, so Jesus did a bunch of cool stuff,
was killed, but his followers claimed
he was alive from the dead.
- [Tim] Yeah. They said that Jesus
was that long-awaited leader who would restore the world.
The apostles compose more writings that fulfill the story
And so his earliest followers, called apostles,
they composed new literary works about the story of Jesus.
They called these good news or the Gospel.
They formed an account called Acts
about the spread of the Jesus movement outside of Israel,
and then they circulated letters
to different Jesus communities all around the ancient world.
- [Jon] And they saw these writings
as part of the Scripture?
- [Tim] Yeah, the apostles wrote all of this
as the fulfillment of that epic story found
in the TaNaK, and they were continuing the literary genius
of the Jewish tradition.
They also believed that God was speaking to his people
through these texts alongside the Scriptures of Israel.
- [Jon] So that's the Old and New Testament.
But what did the early Christians think
of the other Second Temple literature?
- [Tim] Well, different groups had different views
about some of these books,
but we know they read them and valued these texts
because they passed them along with the Jewish Scriptures.
- [Jon] Okay.
So we've got the TaNaK, the Jewish Scriptures.
We got these other Second Temple period works,
then the writing of the apostles
about Jesus.
And that's a lot of literature,
What writings are recognized as Scripture
so what's in my Bible?
- [Tim] So the Christian movement
has taken different forms over 2,000 years.
And from the beginning all Christians recognized
the TaNaK and the New Testament as Scripture.
And for centuries much
of the Second Temple literature was read
as part of the biblical tradition.
The Catholic Church eventually made it official
and called some of the books from this collection
the deuterocanonical books.
Some Orthodox churches used even more books
from this Second Temple literature.
And then in the 1500s during the Reformation,
Protestant Christians wanted to go back
to the oldest writings of the prophets and apostles
so they accepted only the Old and New Testaments.
- [Jon] Okay. I think I got it.
But how does a collection of books produced
over a thousand years by all these different authors
tell one unified story?
- Yeah, that's the question we'll address in our next video.
(vehicle engine revs)
-[Jon] Hey, I'm Jon.
- [Tim] And I'm Tim.
- [Jon] This is the BibleProject.
We believe the Bible is a unified story that leads to Jesus
and has profound wisdom for the modern world.
So we're creating videos to show that.
- [Tim] This was the first in a brand new series
that we're starting,
How to Read the Bible.
But we have lots of other kinds of videos.
You can find it all for free
on our website at jointhebibleproject.com.
- [Jon] In fact, there you can find a handout that will accompany
this video just goes into more detail
and the information that this video is about
and lots of other resources,
so check it out.
You could also be a part
of this by supporting us at thebibleproject.com.
- [Tim] Our goal is to make all these resources available
for free to anybody anywhere.
And we can do that because of your support.
So thanks so much you guys. - [Jon] Thanks.














The book of the prophet Ezekiel.
Ezekiel was a priest
who had been living in Jerusalem
during the First Babylonian Attack on the city.
And they spared the city
but they took a first wave of Israelite prisoners
and hold them off into exile.
And Ezekiel was among them.
So the book begins five years after all that.
And Ezekiel was sitting on the bank of an irrigation canal
near his Israelite refugee camp.
And it's his 30th birthday, no less--
the year that he would have been installed
as a priest in Jerusalem.
Ezekiel's vision
And then all of a sudden Ezekiel has this vision.
He sees a storm cloud approaching.
And then inside the cloud are four strange creatures
that have wings outstretched and touching each other.
And these creatures each had each four faces.
And then he saw four wheels-- one by each creature.
And then he saw that the wings of the creatures
were supporting this dazzling platform.
And on that platform is a throne.
And then sitting on that throne is this human-like creature
glowing and shrouded in fire.
And then all of a sudden Ezekiel realizes what he's seeing.
He calls it
"the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the LORD."
It's God riding His royal throne chariot.
Now the word "glory."
In Hebrew it's "kavod."
It means "heavy" or "significant."
The biblical authors use this word
to describe the physical appearance and manifestation
of God's significance when He shows up in person.
These images in the vision,
they're very similar to what happened
when God appeared on Mount Sinai on the book of Exodus.
And is also very similar to the depictions of God's presence
over the Ark of the Covenant.
And that's actually the most shocking thing about Ezekiel's vision,
"What is God's glory doing in Babylon?"
It's supposed to be above the Ark of the Covenant
in the temple in Jerusalem.
Ezekiel accuses and warns Israel of destruction
And so the first section of the book opens to explore that question
as Ezekiel begins to accuse Israel of rebellion.
So God first speaks to Ezekiel from the throne chariot
and He commissions him as a prophet.
Ezekiel is to accuse Israel of breaking their covenant agreement with God in a couple of ways.
Israel has given their allegiance to other gods
and has been worshipping idols
and this has all led to
rampant social injustice and violence.
And so as a result,
God appoints Ezekiel to warn the people.
The first Babylonian attack
that took Ezekiel into exile
is going to be matched by another.
And Jerusalem, its temple,
all face imminent destruction.
Ezekiel's sign acts of his prophetic message
So Ezekiel uses words and more
to get his message across.
He also performs sign acts.
These were a form of street theater.
Ezekiel would go out on public
and start behaving in this really bizarre ways
that were like parables of his prophetic message.
So he was supposed to build a tiny model of Jerusalem
and then staged an attack of it.
Or he was to shave off all of his hair
and then chop it up with a sword.
Or the most extreme,
he was to play the role of the scapegoat
on the Day of Atonement.
And he would lay on his side for over a year
eating food cooked over poop
as a sign of the nasty food that people would have to eat
during the siege of Jerusalem.
And perhaps the most disheartening thing of all
is the bad news God gave Ezekiel--
that no one was going to listen to him.
Israel would reject him
because of their rebellious and hard heart.
And this recalls Moses' description of the people after the wilderness rebellion
when he predicted that exile would one day happen.
And Ezekiel had the unfortunate privilege of seeing it all come to pass.
Ezekiel's temple vision
And so a dismayed Ezekiel, he begins to perform his task.
And after about a year he has another vision.
This one is about the temple.
He goes on this virtual tour of the temple
and he sees what's happening there in his absence.
And it is not good.
In the outer courtyard, in front of the temple,
he sees this large idol statue.
And then he sees the elders of Israel worshiping other gods,
both outside and inside the temple.
And then he sees the women of Israel,
they're worshiping a Babylonian god named Tammuz.
And the vision ends with God's glorious throne chariot
moving up and away from the temple.
It's leaving, going east headed towards Babylon.
Why and how God's glory appeared in Babylon
And so in chapter 11 we come to see why and how
God's glory appeared to Ezekiel there in Babylon.
Israel's idolatry and their covenant violations.
It's become so blatant and offensive
that God has left His temple.
They've driven Him away
and He consigns it to destruction.
But God hasn't abandoned His people.
Rather He goes into exile with them.
And so at the end of this vision in chapter 11,
God promises that He will return a remnant of Israel back to the land.
And He'll transform them
by removing their heart of stone
and giving them a new soft heart of flesh.
So that they can love and truly follow their God after all.
This is a small glimmer of hope.
And it's quickly submerged under the reality of the imminent destruction.
But chapter 11, it's a key transition.
And it helps us understand how the rest of the book has been designed.
So the next three sections are all announcements of God's judgement.
First, on Israel.
Then, on the nations around Israel.
And then on Jerusalem itself.
But then after that,
the hopeful conclusion of chapter 11 gets developed
in the final 3 sections of the book.
First, hope for Israel.
Then for the nations.
And then for all creation.
Ezekiel depicts Israel's rebellion and idolatry
Chapters 12-24 focus on God's judgment coming to Israel.
And this is a diverse collection of poems and essays.
And here Ezekiel shows his fondness for parable and allegory.
So he depicts Israel as a burnt useless stick,
or as a rebellious wife,
or as a dangerous raging lion that gets captured,
or as two promiscuous sisters.
These are all depictions of Israel's senseless rebellion and idolatry
that results in their ruin.
In this section, Ezekiel also acts like a lawyer.
He begins arguing to the case.
That first of all, Jerusalem's destruction is truly deserved
after centuries of covenant violation.
And that even if the most righteous people in the world
like Noah, or Daniel, or Job
were alive and praying for God to spare Israel
God would not accept their prayers.
It's far too late.
And so God's goodness actually demands
that He bring justice on this generation of Israel.
The exile has become inevitable.
They've reached the point of no return.
God's judgment on the nations
Following this, Ezekiel focuses first on the nations immediately around Israel.
And then on the two most powerful states in the region:
Egypt and then Tyre.
Israel has allied with these nations
and adopted their gods and their idols.
And so God accuses the kings of Tyre and Egpyt
for arrogantly viewing themselves as gods
who get to define right and wrong on their own terms.
And God holds these kings accountable for their pride
and he announces that He will use Babylon to bring them down
They will face God's justice along with everybody else.
Jerusalem falls and the temple is destroyed
Following these really intense sections
is a short story in chapter 33.
Ezekiel's met by a refugee
who's just arrived from Jerusalem
and he gives him the report.
The Babylon has attacked the city of Jerusalem.
That the city has fallen and the temple was destroyed.
Ezekiel's grim warnings have become a reality.
But remember the end of chapter 11,
that's not the end of the story.
And so on the next video,
we'll explore Ezekiel's profound vision of hope.
But for now, that's the first half of the book of Ezekiel.











Jon: You've probably heard the word "holy" before
or at least sang it in a church song once or twice.
And for most people, this idea is really just connected to being a morally good person...
So God is 'holy' because he's morally perfect.
Tim: Yeah, that is part of it...
but in the Bible the idea of 'holiness' is even bigger and more rich.
What it's really describing is how God is the creative force behind the whole universe.
He's the one and only being with the power to make a world full of such beauty and life.
And so all these abilities they may God utterly unique, which is the meaning of the word 'holy'.
A helpful way to think about God's holiness is by using the sun as a metaphor.
The sun is unique, at least within our solar system,
And its really powerful. Its the source of all this beautiful life on our planet.
And so you could say that the sun is 'holy'.
And you can actually take this metaphor even further
in that the whole area around the sun is also 'holy'.
Jon: Yeah because the closer you get to the sun the more intense it gets.
Tim: yeah, exactly. So that very power and goodness that generates all this life is also dangerous.
I mean the sun, if you get too close, will annihilate you.
And in the same way there's this paradox at the heart of God's own holiness
because if you're impure his presence is dangerous to you
and not because it's bad, but because its so good.
And so the first time we see this paradox of God's holiness, it's in the story of Moses and the burning bush.
Jon: So God tells Moses to take off his sandals because he's standing on holy ground.
And Moses covers his face in fear and God says
"hey don't come any closer". Its intense. likely that intensity of God's holiness
Tim: It's actually that intensity of God's holiness that's explored even more in the stories of Israel's temple
which was the main place where God's holy presence was located
and at the center the temple was this room called the Most Holy Place
it's the hotspot of God's presence.
and whether you're an Israelite living in the land around the temple
or a priest working right in the temple, you are in proximity to God's holy presence.
which is dangerous.
Jon: Yeah, this is a problem. So how is it supposed to work?
Tim: Well in the Bible the solution is that you need to become "pure".
Jon: So like being Morally Pure?
Tim: Yeah, and that's easy enough to understand...
...but the Bible spends a lot of time talking about another kind of purity
being Ritually Pure
which is a state where you separate yourself from anything related to death
like touching things like diseased skin, or dead bodies, or even certain bodily fluids.
all these make you impure.
And becoming ritually impure isn't necessarily sinful.
What's wrong is waltzing into God's presence when you're in an impure state.
And so that's why God gave the Israelites very clear instructions for knowing when they were impure...
steps to become pure, so that they could go into the temple again.
Jon: So that's what the book of Leviticus is about.
Tim: Right. But it doesn't stop there. This idea keeps developing
So later in the scriptures we find this really interesting story by a prophet named Isaiah.
And he has this crazy vision where he's in the temple
and he's right in God's presence. He's totally terrified.
Jon: Yeah. He knows the rules. He shouldn't even be in there.
And he's worried about being destroyed.
Tim: And then this crazy creature called a Seraphim.
Jon: Yeah, that is a crazy creature.
Tim: Totally. So it flies over with a hot coal.
And then it sears Isaiah's lips with the coal and says something really weird...
"Your guilt is taken away and your sin is atoned for."
Jon: So this burning coal somehow makes Isaiah pure.
Tim: Yeah, its remarkable
because normally if you touch something impure it transfers its impurity to you.
But now here's this new idea where you have this coal,
this very holy and pure object, and it touches Isaiah
and it transfers its purity to him.
Isaiah is not destroyed by God's holiness, he's transformed by it.
I mean the implications of this are just huge.
But there's one more development, this time from another prophet, Ezekiel.
And he has this vision where he's standing at the temple
and he sees water trickling out from it.
And then that water turns into a stream
and then a grows into a deep river that starts flowing through the desert
leaving this trail of green trees behind it.
And then it flows into the Dead Sea making everything fresh and alive.
Jon: So, instead of becoming pure first and then going into the temple...
...here God's holiness comes out from the temple making things pure bringing them to life.
What does it all mean?
Tim: So, we don't know. Until we meet this man Jesus.
And he claims that he's fulfilling all of these ancient visions but in surprising new ways.
So Jesus, he went around touching people who are impure...
... people with skin diseases, a woman with chronic bleeding, or dead people...
and when he touches them, their impurity should transfer over to Jesus ...
... but instead, Jesus' purity transfers to them and actually heals their bodies.
Jon: Jesus is like that holy coal in Isaiah's vision.
Tim: Right. And Jesus claimed that he was the human embodiment of God's own holiness.
and that he and his followers were now God's temple
so that through them God's holy presence would go out into the world
and bring life and healing and hope.
And so this is why Jesus described his followers as having streams of living water flowing out of them.
Jon: So this is our part of the story where we find ourselves now, but where is it all heading?
Tim: so the last pages of the Bible end with a final vision about God's holiness...
This time it's by a guy named John.
And in his vision we see the whole world made completely new.
The entire earth has become God's temple.
And Ezekiel's river is there flowing out of God's presence,
immersing all of creation,
removing all impurity and bringing everything back to life.

















The book the first and second Samuel.
They're two separate books in our modern Bibles but that division is due simply to scroll length
It was originally written as one coherent story
We're just going to cover the book of first Samuel in this video
So after Israel was rescued from slavery in Egypt they made a covenant with God at Mount Sinai
and eventually came into the promised land
and there, Israel was supposed to be faithful to God and obey the covenant commands
Before the book of Samuel judges showed how Israel failed at that task big time
It was a period of moral chaos and it showed israel's need for wise faithful leaders
The book of Samuel provides an answer to that need
The book of Samuel's story focuses on three main characters
The prophet Samuel where the book gets its name and then King Saul and after that King David
In all three of them transition Israel from a group of tribes ruled by judges
into a unified kingdom ruled by King David in Jerusalem
and the book of Samuel has a fascinating design
that weaves the story of these three characters together in four main parts
Samuel he's the key leader and prophet in the first section of the book
but then he also plays a key role in the next section which is Saul's story and its told in two movements
Saul rises to power and then his failures. In the second part is about his downfall in his tragic death
In the drama of Saul's demise is matched by David's exciting rise to power
and then David's story is told in two movements
First he rides the wave of his success followed by his own tragic failure
and the slow self destruction of his family and then his kingdom
The book concludes with an epilogue that reflects back over the whole story
So let's dive in and see how this all unfolds
Part 1 picks up from the chaos of the book of Judges
and we're introduced to a touching story about a woman named Hannah
and she's grieved because she has never been able to have children
and by God's grace she finally has a son named Samuel
And in joy she sings this amazing poem in chapter two
And the poem is all about how God opposes the proud and exalts the humble
about how despite tragedies and human evil God is working out his purposes in history
and also it's about how God will one day raised up an anointed king for his people
and Hannah's poem has been placed here at the beginning of the book to introduce these key themes
that were gonna see throughout the whole story like the next one
Samuel grows up and becomes a great prophet and leader for the people of Israel
at the same time that the Philistines rise to power as Israel's arch nemesis
And in this crucial battle the Israelites get arrogant
and instead of praying and asking God for help they trot out the Ark of the Covenant
as this kind of magic trophy that will automatically grant them victory in battle
and so because of their arrogant presumption
God allows Israel to lose the battle and the Ark is stolen
so the Philistines they take the Ark and they place it in the temple of their God Dagon
and then the God of Israel defeats the Philistines and their God Dagon
without an army by sending plagues on the people
and then the Philistines don't want the ark anymore obviously and they send it back to Israel
And the point of this little story seems to be this
God is not Israel's trophy and he opposes pride among the Philistines
but also among his own people and so Israel needs to remain humble and obedient
if they want to experience God's covenant blessing
which opens up into the next large section
The Israelite come to Samuel and they say hey we want to King like all the other nations have
Go find one for us and so Samuel he's kind of ticked off and he goes to consult with God
and God says yes their motives are all wrong
but if the king is what they want give them one
and so we're introduced as a figure of Saul
now Saul is a tragic figure because he begins full of promises, tall, he's good looking
He is a perfect candidate for a king but he has deep character flaws
he's dishonest, he lacks integrity and he seems incapable of acknowledging his own mistakes
and so these flaws become his downfail
he wins some battles at the beginning but his flaws went so deep
he eventually disqualified himself by blatantly disobeying God's commands
and so the aging Samuel confronts Saul and Israel
he had warned the people that they would only benefit from a king whose humble and faithful to God
otherwise the kings of Israel will bring ruin
so he informs Saul that God is going to raise up a new king to replace him
and so Saul's downfall begins
as God at the same time is working behind the scenes to raise up that new king
It's an insignificant shepherd boy named David
he's the least likely candidate to be king
but the famous story of David and Goliath shows
that God's choice of David is not based on his family status
but simply on his radical and humble trust in the God of Israel
and so this story embodies all of the themes of Hannah's poem
proud Saul and Goliath are brought low while humble David is exalted
From here we watched Saul slowly descend into madness while David rises to power
so David starts working for Saul as a general
and he's winning all of the battles and he's also winning all of the frame
and so Saul gets jealous and he starts chasing David around, hunting him, trying to kill him
David's done nothing wrong and so David simply runs and waits in the wilderness
and here we see David's true character he has multiple opportunities to kill Saul
but he doesn't, he simply trust that despite Saul's evil, God will raise up a king for his people
What's interesting too is that many of the poems of David
that you find in the Book of Psalms are linked to this very period of his life
and they all expressed the same attitude of trust
and so this section of the book ends with Saul coming to a grisly death after losing a battle with the Philistines
First Samuel tells some of the most intricate well told stories you find anywhere in the Bible
and the characters Saul and David they're portrayed very realistically
and the authors putting them forward as character studies so that you can find yourself in them
so Saul's story, we see a warning
it's crucial that we reflect on our own character flaws
and how they harm us and other people
and with God's help we need to humble ourselves and deal with our dark side
so that Saul's story doesn't become ours
David on the other hand is presented as an example of patience and trust in God's timing in our lives
and so he's running in the wilderness being chased by Saul
David had every reason to think that God had abandoned him
but that's not what he thinks and so David's story encourages us to trust
that despite human evil God is working out his purposes
to oppose the proud and to exalt the humble
and that's what first Samuel is all about





The book of Judges.
So remember after Joshua led the tribe of Israel into the Promised Land
he called them to be faithful to their covenant with God
by obeying the commands of the Torah.
And if they do this, they will show all the other nations what God is like.
So Judges begins with the death of Joshua
basically tells the story of Israel's total failure.
The book's name comes from the type of leaders Israel had in this period.
Before they had any Kings, the tribes were all governed by these "judges".
Now don't think of a courtroom.
These were regional, political, military leaders
more like a tribal chieftain.
And you need to be warned the book of Judges is very disturbing
and violent. It tells the tragic tale of Israel's moral corruption,
of its bad leadership,
and basically how they become no different than the Canaanites.
But this sad story is also meant to generate hope for the future,
and you can see this in how the book is designed.
There's a large introduction that sets the stage for Israel's failure
as they don't drive out the remaining Canaanites.
Then, the large main section of the book has stories about the growing corruption of Israel's judges.
And the progression here shows how Israel's leaders go from pretty good, to
ok, to bad,
to worse.
The concluding section is really disturbing
and shows the corruption of the people of Israel as a whole.
So let's dive in and we can explore each part a bit more.
The opening section begins with the tribes of Israel in their territories in the Promised Land,
and while Joshua defeated some key Canaanite towns,
there is still a lot of land to be taken,
and lots of Canaanites living in those areas.
And so chapter one gives a long list of Canaanite groups and towns
that Israel just failed to drive out from the land.
Now remember, the whole point of driving out the Canaanites
was to avoid their moral corruption and their way of worshiping the gods
through child sacrifice.
God had called Israel to be a holy people
and that does not happen.
Chapter 2 describes how Israel just moved in alongside the Canaanites
adopted all their cultural and religious practices.
and it's right here that the story stops.
For nearly a whole chapter, the narrator gives us an overview of everything that's about to happen
in the body of the book.
This part of Israel's history, the narrator says,
was a series of cycles moving in a downward spiral.
Israel became like the Canaanites,
and so they would sin against God.
So, God would allow them to be conquered and oppressed by the Canaanites,
and eventually the Israelites would see the error of their ways
and repent.
So God would raise up a deliverer of a judge from among Israel, who would defeat the enemy
and bring about an era of peace.
but eventually Israel would sin again and it will all start over.
This cycle provides the literary design and flow for the next main section of the book.
It gets repeated for each of the six main judges
whose stories are told here.
Now the stories of the first three judges
Othniel, Ehud and Deborah
theyre epic adventures - they're also extremely bloody stories.
Either the judge themselves or people who helped the judge -
they defeat their enemies and deliver the people of Israel.
The stories about the next three judges are longer
and they focus in on the character flaws of the judges
which get increasingly worse.
So Gideon, he begins pretty well, he's a coward of a man
but he eventually comes to trust that God CAN SAVE Israel through him
and so he defeats a HUGE army of Midianites with only three hundred men
carrying torches and clay pots.
But Gideon has a nasty temper and he murders a bunch of fellow Israelitas
for not helping him in his battle
and then it all goes downhill from there.
He makes an idol from the gold that he won in his battles
and then after he dies all Israel worships the idol as a god
and the cycle begins again.
The next main judge is Jephthah who's something of a mafia thug living up in the hills
and when things get really bad for Israel the elders come to him begging for his help.
And Jephthah was a very effective leader,
he won lots of battles against the Ammonites.
but he was so unfamiliar with the God of Israel he treats him like a Canaanite god -
he vows to sacrifice his daughter if he wins the battle.
This tragic story it shows just how far Israel has fallen,
they no longer know the character of their own God,
which leads to murder and to false worship.
The last judge Samson is by far the worst.
his life began full of promise, but he has no regard for the God of Israel.
He was promiscuous, violent and arrogant.
He did win brutally strategic victories over the Philistines
but only at the expense of his own integrity
and his life ends in a violent rush of mass murder.
Now a quick note here,
youll notice a repeated theme in the main section of the book
that at key moments Gods Spirit will empower each of these judges
to accomplish these great acts of deliverance.
Now the fact that God uses these really screwed up people
doesnt mean he endorses all or even any of their decisions.
God is committed first and foremost to saving His people
but all he has to work with is these corrupt leaders
and so work with them he does.
This whole section is designed just to show how bad things have gotten -
you cant even tell the Israelites and the Caananites apart anymore,
and thats just the leaders.
The final section shows Israel as a whole hitting bottom.
There are two tragic stories here and they are not for the faint of heart.
Theyre structured by this key line that gets repeated four times at the close of the book
In those days Israel had no king and everyone did what was right in their own eyes.
The first story is about an Israelite named Micah who built a private temple to an idol.
And that gets plundered by a private army sent by the tribe of Dan.
So they come and they steal everything and then they go and burn down the peaceful city of Laish
and murder all of its inhabitants, its a horrifying story.
When Israel forgets its God might makes right.
The final story of the book is even worse,
it's a shocking tale of sexual abuse and violence which all leads to Israels first civil war.
It's very disturbing and thats the point.
These stories are meant to serve as a warning,
Israels descent into self destruction is a result of turning away
from the God who loves them and saved them out of slavery
in Egypt, and now Israel needs to be delivered again from themselves.
The only glimmer of hope in this story is found in this repeated line in the last part of the book.
It actually forms the last sentence of this story.
Israel has no king and so the stage is set for the following books to tell the origins of King Davids family,
the book of Ruth, and also the origins of kingship itself in Israel,
the book of 1 Samuel. But the story of Judges has value as a tragedy -
it's a sobering explanation of the human condition, and ultimately it points out the need for Gods grace
to send a king who will rescue His people.
And thats the book of judges.



So, I've got a question that's always bothered me. The Bible says there is one God.
But, in other parts of the Bible, God is three: Father, Son and Spirit.
How can it be both?
Yeah, this is a question that has mystified people for thousands of years.
And, while we can't fully explain it,
I think we can better understand what it is that we can't fully understand.
What do you mean?
well, think of it this way:
Here is a two-dimensional plane.
And then, here is an object with three-dimensions, that is going to pass through the 2D plane.
Ok, right! From this perspective, the 3D object
is above and below the plane.
So, now it makes sense, but imagine you were a 2D person, stuck in the 2D plane.
What would you see?
I don't know... what would I see?
Well, it would look like this!
Oh! Yeah, ok.
From this perspective, it looks impossible- it's one object, then two objects and then three!
But in reality, they are all one, just not in the way you are capable of understanding.
Now, let's take this whole thing as a visual analogy for how we experience God.
The claim in the Bible, is that God is transcendent.
A divine being through whom we live, move and have our being,
or as Gods says "I AM".
Ok, but I live here in this universe
so, when God appears, it will make sense in some ways, but in other ways, it will break my categories.
Exactly! This happens all the time when people encounter the God of the Bible.
So, let's look first at how this happens in the Hebrew Scriptures.
Throughout the Hebrew Scriptures, God appears in complicated ways that don't quite fit our categories.
One common way this happens is with God's attributes.
So, an attribute is a way to describe what something is like.
For example, a soccer ball is round.
Right!
Or, God is wise.
Yeah, great! Let's take God's wisdom.
So, the Book of Proverbs says that God created the world by His wisdom.
But then, there are also poems in the Book of Proverbs that describe God's wisdom as a person,
A co-worker through whom God architected the universe.
So, God's attributes becomes a separate character?
Yeah! This also happens with God's glory,
which sometimes appears as a human figure on a throne that is engulfed in fire.
Or, take God's word, which He can speak to people,
but sometimes His word appears like a person.
Wait! So, God's attributes have become new little gods?
No, no! The biblical authors believe there is only one all-powerful God.
But they are comfortably talking about them as different characters.
Yeah! This is part of the way the biblical authors portray the one God's complex identity.
They are God's attributes and also distinct from God.
Distinct from God and also God?
Yes! Once we learn to spot that way of talking about God's identity, you begin to see it all over the Scriptures.
In fact, you find it in the first sentences of the Bible that mention the Spirit of God.
So, the opening line of the Bible is pretty familiar.
"In the beginning, God created..."
But then keep reading. Who is it that we see within creation hovering over the waters?
The Spirit of God!
Yeah! So, the spirit refers to God's personal presence and energy that we can interact with here within creation.
And so the Bible can refer to God's Spirit as distinct from God.
Distinct from God and also God.
It's God's Spirit.
And while this sounds strange from our point of view, this complexity is what the biblical authors are trying to get us to see.
So, we've looked at God's attributes and God's Spirit.
Now, let's make our last stop at exploring God's complex identity in the Hebrew Scriptures, with a character called the "Son of Man."
So, in the Bible, there is only one God that people are to worship.
Which makes this story in the Book of Daniel really surprising.
Daniel has a dream about a human figure,
called the Son of Man, which means a member of humanity.
And Daniel dreams about this human getting elevated on a cloud, up, and then higher up,
Up into God's space,
Yes, and then this human sits at the right hand of God's heavenly throne,
And all humanity worships this human alongside God.
A human, where I expect to see God?
Yeah! This human is a part of God's identity.
This vision is about the climactic hope of the whole biblical story.
God and humanity become one so they can rule the world together as one.
So, the Son of Man is distinct from God, and also God?
Exactly! So, think back over everything we've looked at.
In the Hebrew Scriptures, God's identity is complex.
An so, when Jesus' followers encounter God as the Father, the Son and the Spirit,
They already had categories for how these could all be the One God of the Bible.
Ok, let's talk about that.
Ok so, in the New Testament we're introduced to Jesus of Nazareth,
and He is human, but way more.
His favorite title to call himself was the "Son of Man."
The figure in Daniel's vision?
And, the claim is that He is this complex God becoming human,
to unite other humans with God.
Ok, so the Gospels portray Jesus as fully human.
And also as YHWH, the God of Israel.
Jesus went around saying and doing things that only YHWH can do, like:
forgiving people's sins, or calming the chaotic waters...
So, they are saying that Jesus is a human, distinct from God, and also God.
Yeah! And, that might sound crazy, unless you've been reading the Hebrew Scriptures, which prepared you for it.
And, then check this out:
Jesus' first followers, the Apostles, talked about His identity using the language of God's attributes.
They called Jesus the "Glory of God."
Or the apostle Paul called Jesus, "The Wisdom of God."
Or John opens his Gospel calling Jesus the "Word of God, through whom the world was created,"
and then he says: "The Word was with God and was God."
Ok, I get what they are doing and it hurts my brain.
Totally, and if you want to spin your brain even more consider this:
Jesus, who is portrayed as God become human, would talk to God as a distinct person.
And when he did, he called him "Father."
When Jesus talked about God, he wasn't referring to an abstract force or energy,
he was talking about a personal being that you can relate to.
There are a lot of personal images of God in the Bible - ruler, creator, judge...
But, Jesus consistently refer to God as "My Father."
Jesus experienced God as a source of infinite love.
He said: "the Father has loved me since before the creation of the world."
Apparently, Jesus knew the Father as an eternally others-centered, life-giving being.
Right! Like in the story about Jesus' baptism, when the Father says from heaven:
"This is My Son whom I love."
And then keep reading,
In that story, the person who brings that message of love from the Father to the Son, is the Spirit of God.
So, we've talk about God's spirit.
Here within creation, it is through the Spirit that we interact with the divine.
Yeah! And the same was true for Jesus.
Through the Spirit, He experienced the Father's love.
But it didn't stop there.
Jesus promised that through Him, the Spirit would go out and share the Father's love with all humanity and with all creation.
So, it can look like these are three distinct Gods, but in some way (that transcends my view of reality)
they're also one.
Right!
This is what, later, followers of Jesus called "The Trinity".
Father, the Son and the Spirit are the one God of the Bible.
I can see how they got there.
But, this isn't just a philosophy puzzle.
To describe God as a Tri-unity is to claim that the universe is held together by an eternal community of love.
Which is something that I can't really understand.
But, the God of the Bible isn't a being that you understand.
The point is to know, and be known, by this God,
So that we can participate in His love









The Gospel according to Matthew
It's one of the earliest official accounts about Jesus of Nazareth: his life,
his death and his resurrection.
The book itself is anonymous
but the earliest reliable tradition links it to Matthew,
the tax collector, who was one of the twelve apostles
that Jesus appointed
and he actually appears within
the book itself.
For about 30 to 40 years, the apostles orally taught
and passed on their eyewitness' account about Jesus
along with his teachings that they had all memorized.
Matthew has then collected and arranged all these into this amazing tapestry
and designed the book to highlight certain themes about Jesus.
In this video, we're just going to cover the first half of the book.
Specifically, Matthew wants to show how Jesus is
the continuation and fulfillment
of the whole biblical story about God in Israel:
1. that Jesus is the Messiah from the line of David;
2. that he is a new authoritative teacher like Moses;
3. and not only that Jesus is: "God with us"
or in Hebrew "Immanuel".
Matthew's designed this book with an introduction
and a conclusion. These act like a frame
around five clear sections right here in the center
each of which concludes with a long
block of Jesus's teaching.
Now this design is very intentional and it's amazing.
Just watch how this works!
Chapters 1 through 3: they set the stage by
attaching Jesus's story right on
to the story line of the Old Testament scriptures.
So Matthew opens with the genealogy about Jesus
that highlights how he is from the messianic line of
the son of David and he's a son of Abraham.
That means he's going to bring God's blessing to all of the nations.
After that we get the famous story about Jesus's birth
and how all of the events fulfilled the Old Testament prophetic promises:
that the nations would come and honor the Messiah;
that the messiah would be born in Bethlehem.
But even more than that, Jesus's conception by the Holy Spirit,
his name Immanuel, all these work together to show that
Jesus is no mere human. He is God with us.
God becomes human.
So you can see two of Matthew's key themes right here in the introduction:
1. He's from the line of David
2. He's Immanuel.
But Matthew also wants to show how Jesus is a new Moses.
So like Moses, Jesus came up out of Egypt.
He passed through the waters of Baptism
and he entered into the wilderness for 40 days.
Then Jesus goes up onto a mountain
to deliver his new teaching.
So through all of this, Matthew was claiming that
Jesus is the promised greater than Moses figure
who's going to deliver Israel from slavery,
he's going to give them new divine teaching.
he's going to save them from their sins.
and bring about a new covenant relationship between God and his people.
This Moses and Jesus parallel also explains
why Matthew has structured the center of the book the way that he did.
These five main parts highlight
Jesus as a teacher and he's created a parallel.
Jesus as a teacher, parallels the five books of Moses.
Jesus is the new authoritative covenant teacher
who's going to fulfill the story line of the Torah.
Now in the first section, chapters 4 to 7,
Jesus steps onto the scene announcing the arrival of God's Kingdom.
And this is really key:
the kingdom is in essence about God's rescue operation
for his whole world and it's taking place through King Jesus.
Jesus has come to confront evil, especially,
spiritual evil and its whole legacy of demon oppression and disease and death.
Jesus has come to restore
God's Rule and reign over the whole world
by creating a new
family of people who will
follow him obey his teachings
and live under his rule.
So after Jesus begins healing people and forming
a movement, a community, he takes his followers out to a
mountain or a hillside and he delivers his first big block
of teaching traditionally called the Sermon on the Mount.
Here Jesus explores what it looks like to follow him
and live in God's kingdom.
It's an upside-down kingdom where there are no privileged members.
So the poor, the nobodies, the wealthy, the religious,
everybody is invited and is called to turn to repent
and to follow Jesus and join his family.
Jesus says that he's not here to set aside
the commands of the Torah or the Old Testament,
rather he's here to fulfill all of that
through his life, through his teachings.
He's here to transform the hearts of his people
so that they can truly love God and love their neighbor,
including their enemy.
After concluding his great teaching on the kingdom,
the next section shows Jesus bringing
the kingdom into reality in the day-to-day lives of people.
So Matthew's arranged here nine stories about Jesus
bringing the power of God's Kingdom
into the lives of hurting broken people.
There are three groups of three stories.
They're all about people who are sick or
have broken bodies or they're in danger.
Jesus heals or saves them by these acts of grace and power.
Then right, in between these triads,
we find two parallel stories about Jesus's call
that people should follow him.
Matthew's making a point here: one can only experience
the power of Jesus's Grace by following him and
becoming his disciple.
Now, after Matthew has shown
the power of the kingdom through Jesus,
Jesus then extends his reach by sending out
the twelve disciples who are going to go do what he's been doing.
This leads to the second large block of teaching chapter 10.
Here, Jesus teaches his disciples how to announce the
kingdom and what to expect once they do.
Many among Israel are accepting Jesus in his offer
of the kingdom, but Israel's leaders
they aren't. They stand to lose a lot
if they repent and become disciples of Jesus.
So Jesus knows they're going to reject him and
persecute his followers, which is exactly
what happens. In the next section chapters 11 through 13,
Matthew has collected a group of stories about how people are responding to Jesus and his message.
It's a mixed bag.
So some stories are positive.
People love Jesus and they think he's the Messiah.
Others are more neutral like John the Baptist
or even the members of Jesus's own family.
They make it clear that Jesus is not what they expected
Then you have Israel's leaders.
They're entirely negative.
You have the Pharisees and the Bible scholars.
They all reject Jesus together.
They think he is a false teacher,
he's leading the people astray.
They think he's blasphemous,
in these exalted claims he's making about himself.
But Jesus isn't surprised or thrown by all these diverse
responses. In fact, he focuses on it in the third block of teaching in chapter 13.
Here Matthews collected together a bunch of Jesus's
parables about the kingdom: like about a farmer
throwing seed on four types of soil;
or about a mustard seed;
or a pearl or buried treasure.
These parables are like a commentary on the stories
that you've just read in chapters 11 and 12.
Some people are accepting Jesus with enthusiasm,
others are rejecting him.
But God's kingdom is of ultimate value, and it will not
stop spreading despite all of these obstacles.
So, that's the first half of the gospel according to Matthew.
Now, here's a few more things to look for as you read through these chapters.
Matthew's presenting Jesus, remember,
as the continuation and fulfillment of the Old Testament story lines.
So, look for how he weaves in quotations from the Old Testament scriptures and what you'll find is that
they're placed at strategic points in the story explaining more about
Jesus and his identity. So, stop take time to go look up these
references and read them in their Old Testament context
and most often you'll discover really cool interesting connections.
Lastly, pay attention to the types of people who accept
Jesus and follow him.
You'll see that it's most often people who are
unimportant, they're or they're irreligious.
These are the people who are
transformed by their trust or faith in Jesus and follow him.
It's the religious and the prideful who are offended by him
So how is this tension between Jesus and Israel's
leaders going to play itself out? That's what the second half of Matthew is all about.




So, we have been learning about spiritual beings in the Bible and I still have a lot of questions about the bad ones.
Well, great. Let's talk about the Satan and demons in the story of the Bible.
The Bible's first portrait of evil
Let's start in the beginning.
In Genesis 1, God creates a beautiful, ordered reality out of darkness and disorder so that life can flourish.
He appoints humans as his representatives to rule over all of it.
And seven times God calls it "good".
Yeah, I experience that kind of goodness often in the world in things like beauty, truth, love, and generosity.
But in Genesis 3 we meet a creature who is in a state of rebellion against his creator.
We are not told yet why or how he rebels.
But he is on a mission to ruin God's good world for other creatures.
This thing is trouble.
Yeah, this creature is the Bible's first portrait of evil.
It distorts what God has purposed for good; ruining and dragging creation back into darkness and disorder.
So the humans join the spiritual rebel which leads them back into chaos and death.
From this point on, the human rebellion is interwoven with a spiritual rebellion.
The biblical story shows how this happens over and over again.
The snake in the Garden of Eden
Okay, but wait.
We are getting all this from a slithering snake?
Well, there are clues in the story that it is more than just a snake.
Remember, Eden is a high place where the earth and its creatures overlap with heaven and its creatures.
So, the snake could be a spiritual being?
Well, Genesis 3 points in that direction.
And then, later biblical authors fill in the picture.
Like when the prophet Isaiah has a vision of God's heavenly throne room.
He is surrounded and being praised by the spiritual beings.
Yeah, these are the cherubim around God's throne.
But when Isaiah sees these creatures he describes them as "seraphim" which in Hebrew means "snake".
Ah, so the snake is like a former staff member in God's throne room.
So why is he talking to the humans?
Well, the prophet Ezekiel understood this figure as a spiritual rebel who didn't want to live under God's wisdom and authority.
He wanted to be God.
Alright, that is the same temptation the snake puts before Adam and Eve.
Exactly! He says they could rule the world like God, but by their own wisdom.
How biblical authors talk about the Satan
So they are all kicked out of the garden.
Yeah, God says this rebel will now crawl on its belly.
Where does it go after this?
Well, the biblical authors offer subtle clues where this being is at work behind the scenes,
animating division and hatred between humans.
They also use a variety of images to describe this being.
It is a snake, or a sea dragon, or a dark desert creature, or the king of death in the grave.
He is also given many titles like "Tempter," or the "The Evil One," or "The Devil," which in Greek means "The Slanderer".
But his name is Satan, right?
Actually, no. Satan is not a name.
It is another one of these titles which is why, in Hebrew, it has the word "the" in front of it.
"The Satan" means "The Adversary" because he isn't for anything rather.
Rather, he is anti everything, working through lies to drag us back into darkness and disorder.
The rebellion of demons
That is intense.
Now, what about these other spiritual rebels in the Bible called "demons"?
What are they all about?
Okay. Remember the concept of God's heavenly staff team, the Divine Council, or the sons of God.
In the Hebrew Scriptures, we are told that some of these rebelled too.
When did that happen?
Multiple times, actually.
After the snake comes the rebellion of the sons of God in Genesis 6.
We are told that they have sex with women who then give birth to violent warrior giants.
Oh, right. The nephilim.
These are probably the strangest characters in the whole Bible.
Well, strange from your point of view.
But ancient readers knew exactly what was going on.
The ancient kingdoms around Israel claimed to be founded and protected by giant warrior kings. Who
were part human, part God, and filled with divine wisdom.
I see. So the biblical authors are saying, "Hey, those warrior kings, they shouldn't be honored!"
Right! In this story, they are portrayed as human rebels who are captive to spiritual evil.
Spreading their violence in God's good world.
Yeah, one of those kings in Genesis 10 goes on to build the city of Babylon.
Yes, Nimrod, whose name sounds like the Hebrew word for rebel.
His kingdom leads to the next rebellion where humans exalt themselves in Babylon.
But God scatters that rebellion.
And when Moses in Deuteronomy looks back at that story,
he says that is the moment when God handed over the nations to worship the rebel host of heaven, the gods of money, sex, and military power.
Moses is the first one to call them "demons", that is, lesser spiritual beings.
How demons work evil into the world
Demons are spiritual forces at work behind corrupt human power structures
Yes, but in the Bible they also work on the personal level.
Animating and exploiting humanity's greed and selfishness, as well as the weakness of our mortal bodies.
In the Bible, spiritual evil is at work in anything that drags God's good creation back into chaos, darkness and death.
How Jesus viewed pain and suffering
So, this is why when Jesus arrives on the scene, he said his primary enemy is not human.
Right. Jesus and his first followers viewed all the pain and suffering in God's good world
as a sign of its captivity to death and spiritual evil.
But they didn't think this was the end of the story.
Right! Jesus knew that the only way out of this cosmic ruin
is to overcome evil and death itself, even if it costs everything.
You just watched a video in our Spiritual Beings series.
This one was on the Satan and demons.
Next up is our last episode about how Jesus opens the way for a new humanity to rule with God over heaven and earth.








The Book of Daniel.
The story is set right after Babylon's first attack on Jerusalem
and they had plundered the city and its temple and taken a wave of Israelites into exile.
Among them were four men from the royal family of David.
Daniel, whose later named Belteshazzar
and his three friends, who you probably know by their Babylonian names:
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego.
This book tells of their struggles to maintain
hope in the land of their conquerors.
The book's design seems pretty simple at first--
Chapters one through six contains stories about Daniel and his friends in Babylon
while chapters 7 through 12 contain the visions of Daniel about the future.
But this two-part shape is made even more interesting by another design feature.
And that's the book's language.
It begins in Hebrew, the language of the Israelites.
But chapters 2 through 7 are written in Aramaic,
a cousin language to Hebrew spoken widely among the ancient empires.
But then in chapters 8 through 12 it goes back to Hebrew.
This design shows how chapters 2 through 7 are a coherent section
but it also highlights the importance of chapters two and seven
for understanding the later chapters of the book.
Let's just dive in.
Chapter one introduces the basic attention of the first half of the book.
Daniel and his friends. They're really wise and capable.
And they're recruited to serve in the Royal Palace of Babylon.
But they're pressured to give up their Jewish identity by living and eating
like Babylonians and violating the Jewish food laws found in the Torah.
So they refuse and they choose faithfulness to the Torah and it puts them in danger.
But God delivers them and they end up being elevated by the king of Babylon.
After this begins the Aramaic section which you'll see has this really cool
symmetrical design.
So first the king of Babylon has a dream
that it turns out only Daniel is able to interpret.
It's about a huge statue made of four types of metal
and it symbolizes a sequence of kingdoms and the head is Babylon.
But then a huge rock comes flying in and it shatters the statue
and it becomes this huge mountain.
Now this dream is the first of many symbolic visions in the book
and this one introduces the basic story line of them all.
Daniel says that the statue represents a train of human kingdoms following from Babylon
and they will all fill God's world with violence.
But one day God's kingdom will come and will confront and humble the arrogant kingdoms of this world
and fill the world with the healing justice of God's reign and rule.
After this, chapter 3 tells the famous story of Daniel's three friends
who refused to bow down and worship a huge idol statue,
which like the statue in chapter 2 represents the king in his imperial power.
So the friends are persecuted. They're thrown into a fiery furnace.
But God delivers them from death and they're exalted by the king
who now acknowledges their God is the true one.
After this come a pair of stories about two Babylonian kings,
the father, Nebuchadnezzar and then his son, Belshazzar.
They're both filled with pride because of their imperial power.
And so, like in chapter two, God warns them both through dreams and then visions,
which also like chapter 2 only Daniel can interpret.
He says that both kings are to humble themselves before God
and both kings arrogantly resist.
So Nebuchadnezzar is stricken with madness.
He becomes like a beast in the field.
But then he humbles himself before God and his humanity returns to him.
He's restored as king.
This is in contrast with his son Belshazzar who doesn't humble himself before God
and he's assassinated that very night.
Now these two stories draw this imagery from Genesis chapters one and two and Psalm 8
where humans are depicted as the royal image of God.
He has given them authority to rule over the beasts of the field, the birds of the air
on behalf of God who is the world's true king.
But when human kingdoms forget that,
when they rebel and make themselves and their power into a "god,"
they become less than human like violent beasts who will face God's justice.
Which brings us to chapter six, the pair of chapter three.
And this time it's Daniel who is being persecuted
because he refuses to pray and worship the king as a god.
And so like the friends, he's sentenced to death and he's thrown into a lion's den.
But God delivers him from the beasts
and like the friends, the king exalts Daniel and praises his God,
which brings us to chapter 7.
It's the pair of chapter 2 and the center of the book
where all its themes come together.
It's another dream but it's Daniel's this time.
And ironically he cannot understand the dream until an angelic messenger explains it to him.
He sees a series of four beasts: the one like a lion
then like a bear, then one like a winged leopard.
Each of these symbolizing an arrogant kingdom.
And last of all is a super beast identified as a really evil empire
and it has lots of horns -- a common symbol for kings in the Old Testament.
And there's one specific horn
who is an image of an arrogant king who exalts himself above God
and persecute God's people.
Now they are symbolized by a figure called the "Son of Man"
who is an image for both God's covenant people but also for their King from the line of David.
But then all of a sudden, God, who is called the Ancient of Days,
comes and He sets up His throne.
He destroys the super beast and He exalts the Son of Man on the clouds
where he comes up to sit at God's right hand
and share in God's rule over the nations.
We can look back now and see how all of these stories in the first half fit together.
The three stories of faithfulness despite persecution.
These are meant to offer hope to God-suffering people among the nations.
But they suffer because human kingdoms have rebelled against God and become beasts.
And so these visions encourage patience that God's people are to wait for him
to bring his kingdom and rule over our world and vindicate his suffering people.
But it raises the question about when God is going to do that and that's what
these final three visions set out to explore.
In chapter 8, Daniel has another vision about the final two beasts of chapter 7.
But this time they are symbolized by a ram who we're told is an image of the empire of the Medes and Persians.
And then by a goat who is an image of ancient Greece.
And out of the goat come a whole bunch of horns,
one of which symbolizes the evil king from chapter 7.
And we're told more about him. That he will attack Jerusalem
and exalt himself above God and defile the temple with idols.
However in the end he will be destroyed by God
who will exalt His people and His kingdom.
Now by chapter 9, Daniel is very puzzled
especially as to when all of this is going to take place.
So he consults the scroll of the prophet Jeremiah
where God said that Israel's exile would only last 70 years
so for Daniel the 70 years is almost up and
so he asked God to fulfill His promise soon.
But an angel comes and informs him
that Israel's sin and rebellion has continued and so their time of exile and
oppression will continue on seven times longer than Jeremiah envisioned.
Daniel is deeply disturbed by this and he has one final vision.
We're shown the same sequence of kingdoms. It's Persia and then Greece and
Alexander the Great followed by lesser kings all leading up to this final king of the north,
who will invade Jerusalem, set up idols in the temple and exalt himself above God.
But then all of a sudden this king comes to ruin.
Now there's been endless debate about what all of these visions refer to.
Many see a clear connection to the exploits of the Syrian king Antiochus in the 160s BC.
He killed many faithful Jews in Jerusalem and set up idols in the temple.
Others think it points forward to the Roman Empire's role in the execution of Jesus
and the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple in AD70.
And still others think it will be fulfilled in future events that have yet to happen when Jesus will return.
Now the problem is that the symbols and the numbers they don't quite match any of these views perfectly.
But it opens up the possibility that in a sense they are all right.
The book of Daniel has been designed to offer hope to all future generations of God's people.
It did so in the days of Antiochus' Empire and it has ever since.
This is why Jesus could use imagery from Daniel to describe and confront the oppressive leaders he confronted in Jerusalem.
This is why John the visionary who wrote the Revelation could adapt Daniel's visions
and apply them to Rome of his day and also all future oppressive empires.
And so the point of Daniel is that all generations of readers can find here a pattern and a promise.
It's a pattern that human beings and their kingdoms become violent beasts
when they glorify their own power, when they redefine right and wrong
and don't acknowledge God is their true king.
But Daniel also holds out a promise that one day God will confront the Beast.
He will rescue His world and His people by bringing His kingdom over all nations.
And so for every generation, this book speaks a message of hope that should motivate faithfulness.
And that's what the book of Daniel is all about.







The book of first and second kings
Although they are two separate books in our Bibles
They were originally written as one book telling a unified story
that continues on from the book of Samuel that came before it
So David has unified the tribes of Israel into a kingdom
and God promised that from his line would come a Messianic king
who would establish God's kingdom over the nation's and fulfill the promises made to Abraham
So the Book of Kings tells the story of the long line of Kings that came after David
and none of them lived up to that promise
In fact, they run the nation of Israel right into the ground
The book is designed to have five main movements
the story begins and ends focus on Jerusalem
First with Solomon's reign in the construction of the temple
and then in this last section ending with jerusalem's destruction and Israel's exile to Babylon
and the story leading up to this tragedy is what makes up the center three sections
which explain how Israel split into two rival kingdoms
how God tried to prevent the corruption of Israel by sending the prophets
and how exile became unavoidable consequence of Israel's sins
The book opens with two chapters about the kingdom passing from the aging David to his son Solomon
and David's final words to Solomon they're very similar to those of Moses and Joshua and Samuel to the people
It's a call to remain faithful to the commands of the covenants
and to give allegiance to the God of Israel alone
but David's words bring somewhat hollow here
because David and Solomon then go on to conspire how they're going to consolidate this new kingdom
through a whole series of political assassinations
so it's not off to a great start
Solomon's brightest moment comes when he asked God for wisdom to lead Israel
and he even complete David's dream to make a temple for the God of Israel
Here the story actually stops and describes the design of this temple in detail
just like the tabernacle design in the Torah
there's all these gold and jewels and depictions of angels and fruit trees
It's all symbolism echoing back to the garden of eden
it's the place where heaven and earth meet where God's presence dwells with his people
but no sooner does Solomon finish the temple
but he makes them really horrible choices and the Kingdom falls apart
he starts marrying the daughters of other kings hundreds of them for political alliances
and then he adopts their gods and introduces the worship of those gods into Israel
Solomon then accumulates huge amounts of wealth he built a huge army
He even Institute slave labor for all of his building projects
Now if you go back to the Torah and look at God's guidelines for Israel's kings in Deuteronomy 17
Solomon is breaking every one
so by the time that he dies
Solomon resembles Pharaoh the king of Egypt more than he does his father David
the next section of the book opens with Solomon's son, Rehoboam, acting just like his father
it's a very sad story of greed and lust for power
he tries to increase taxes for slave labor
and under the leadership of Jeroboam the northern tribes reject this
they rebelled and secede and form their own rival Kingdom
and so now in the story you have the southern kingdom of Judah
centered in Jerusalem with Kings from the line of David
and now this new northern kingdom called Israel
who's capital will be Samaria eventually
Jeroboam also goes on to build two new temples to compete with Solomon's temple in the south
he put the Golden Calf in each one to represent the God of Israel
The connection to Exodus 32 and the Golden Calf It's all quite explicit
From this point on the story goes back and forth from north to south tracing the fate of both kingdoms
Each one had about 20 successive kings
and as the author introduces each king he evaluates their reign by a few criteria
did they worship the God of Israel alone or did they promote the worship other gods
did they deal with idolatry among the people
and did they remained faithful to the Covenant like David or do they become corrupt and unjust
and according to these criteria the author finds no good kings in northern Israel zero for twenty
And then in southern Judah only eight out of 20 get a positive rating
which connects to another huge purpose in this book
and that to introduce the role of the prophet key figures in israel's history
so in the Bible, prophets were not fortune tellers rather they spoke on behalf of the God of Israel
and they played the role of Covenant watchdog
which means they called out idolatry and injustice among the Kings and the people
they were constantly reminding Israel of their calling to be a light to the nations
that they should obey the commands of the Torah
and so the prophets challenged Israel to repent and follow their God
In these centres sections for each King, God then raises up prophets to hold them accountable
the most prominent prophets over the northern ones are Elijah and his disciples Elisha
right here in the center of the book
Elijah was a wild man of a prophet living out in the desert
and his arch nemesis was the northern King Ahab and his Canaanite wife Jezebel
together these two had instituted the worship of the Canaanites God Baal over Israel
and so in a famous story Elijah challenged four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal
to a contest to see which God was a real
so they both built altars and prayed to their gods
but only the God of Israel answers with fire
After this, Ahab uses his royal power to murder an Israelite farmer and then steal his family's vineyard
and the Elijah again confront Ahab's injustice and he announces the downfall of his house
Elijah eventually passes the mantle of his prophetic leadership to a young disciple named Elisha
who asks for two times the authority of Elijah
but what's fascinating here is how the author is recounted 7 miraculous feats for Elijah
and then he offers stories of 14 acts of power from Elisha
Both prophets were clearly remarkable men and they played the same role confronting Israel's Kings
for idolatry and injustice and ultimately they were unsuccessful in turning Israel back from apostasy
In the next section, the northern kingdom has rocked by a bloody revolution started by a king named Jehu
who destroys Ahab's family and although Jehu was at first commissioned by God
his violence just gets out of control
and it creates the spiral of political assassinations and rebellions from which Israel never recovered
coup follows coup after Jehu
and each King follows other gods allows horrible injustice it all leads up to second Kings chapter 17
the big bad empire of Assyria swoops down and takes out the northern kingdom altogether
and the capital city of Samaria is conquered
and the Israelites were exiled and scattered throughout the ancient world
now chapter 17 is key
the author stops the story and offers this prophetic reflection and what's just happened
he blames the downfall of the northern kingdom on the idolatry
and covenant unfaithfulness of Israel and its kings
and so God has allowed them to face the consequences of their decisions
The final movement of the book tells the story of the lone southern kingdom
In here, we meet very heroic kings like Hezekiah who trust God
when the armies of Assyria come knocking on Jerusalem's door
or Josiah who discovers this lost scroll of the Torah in the temple
So he start to reading it. He's convicted
and he institutes religious reforms to remove idolatry in Canaanite influences from the land
but Judah is just too far gone
The King right in between these two, Menassah. He's the worst by far
so he not only introduces the worship of idols statues into the Jerusalem Temple,
he also institutes child sacrifice
And so God sends prophets to say the time is up. Israel has reached the point of no return
The final chapters tell the story of the Babylonian Empire coming to invade Jerusalem destroy the temple
and carry the people and the royal line of David off into exile
and so the story ends leaving us wondering has God done with Israel
has he done with a line of David
Well, the final paragraph zooms about forty years forward into the exile
and it tells very odd story. It's about Jehoiachin, a descendant from David
who would have been king and he was back in Jerusalem
and the king of Babylon releases him from prison and invite them to eat at the Royal table for the rest of his life
and the book ends
so it's not much but it's a story that gives a glimmer of hope
that God has not abandon the line of David
so the question now is how is that going to fulfill his promises to Abraham to David
How he is going to bless the nations and bring the Messianic Kingdom
and answer those questions you have to read on into the wisdom and the prophetic books
but for now that's the Book of Kings




Jon: There's this crazy story at the beginning of the Bible we have Adam and Eve
and they in there in the Garden of Eden.
Tim: And everything in the garden is great exactly is it should be except
there's this one tree that they're told by God not to eat from because it's
dangerous and it will kill them.
Jon: So that's it, just avoid this fruit tree and we are fine?
Tim: Right, it seems pretty simple. But in this garden there's a snake
and it starts telling a different story. It says that if you eat of this tree it is not
going to kill you
in fact it's going to make you become like God.
Jon: And Adam and Eve, they believe the snake and the the fruit.
Tim: And because it is this the goodness of the garden is tragically lost and the evil and death
enters into God's good world.
Jon: Now, why is there a talking snake in the garden? I mean this thing is a problem.
Tim: Yeah, it is very strange, and even more strange is the fact that the Bible doesn't say why
or how this thing even got there. It simply presents the snake as this
creature who's in rebellion against God and wants to get
other people to doubt God's goodness and lead them on a path toward death.
And so whatever this snake is,
it's the source of evil that pervades our world and our lives even still today
Jon: But there is some hope because right here in the story God makes this really
interesting promise to Adam and Eve.
Tim: That someone is going to come in the future, a son of Eve,
and this guys gonna common is gonna crash the Serpent's head and destroy evil
at its source. However during this battle
t he serpent is going to bite this guy's heal.
Jon: So it's like I'm mutual destruction
Tim: Yes. It is a strange and beautiful promise and just hanging there until the next key moment in the story...
...when God singled out this guy named Abraham
and says that through his family goodness and blessing is going to be
restored back to all of the nations in the world
and as we follow this family we get to one of Abraham's great-grandsons, this guy named Judah.
and he receives this promise that a king is going to come from his line
and that the whole world is going to follow this king, and he's going to bring
peace and harmony and there will be lots of
food and wine and milk in vineyard and it's going to be awesome.
Jon: The first king that we meet from the line of Judah is a guy named King David
and he's a hero maybe he is the Snake Crusher
Tim: But it turns out that David is infected with the same evil
as the rest of humanity. He never crushes the snake
just the opposite. However God makes a promise to David that this king
is going to eventually come from his line. But as you go on in the story
one by one each generation of his sons they're just total
chumps they give in to the snake, they choose evil
they go after money and sex and power and following other gods.
Jon: Things get so bad that they run the nation of Israel
right into the ground and the big bad Empire of Babylon just takes them out.
Tim: So now there are no more Kings to even fulfill this promise.
Jon: So seems like the whole plan is lost.
Tim: But during these dark days there's these crazy group of guys called Prophets
and they kept talking about this coming King and reminding us of the
promise that he'll come he will defeat evil
and restore the garden. Now one specific profit Isaiah -
he tells us more about why this King is bitten
Isaiah says that the promised King receives this wound
because of humanity's evil, and that it kills him.
But then all of a sudden he comes back and Isaiah says that is because he suffered this wound
that he can now become a source of healing to other people.
Jon: But the Old Testament ends and the snake crushing King that everyone's been
talking about never shows up.
Tim: And that is why when the New Testament begins it introduces us to
Jesus of Nazareth
not as some random guy but as someone who comes to fulfill these specific ancient promises.
Jon: Yeah, we learn that he's from the line of David, Judah, and Abraham.
Tim: And he goes around Israel announcing
that the goodness of God's kingdom is here now and he begins
confronting the affects of evil on people by healing them by forgiving them of their sins and evil
Jon: Many people are now believing that this is in fact the promised King
Tim: Bit Jesus began telling his closest followers
that he was going to become king and bring peace
by taking the full effect if humanity's evil into himself.
Jon: That fatal snake bite wound.
Tim: And so it seems like the serpent wins
and this story actually would be a tragedy except for what happens next.
Jesus rises from the dead.
Jon: A nd now Jesus has the power over evil and death for himself.
Tim: So the rest at the New Testament is then making this claim
the Jesus' power over evil and death has now become available
to us to begin confronting the effects evil in our own lives.
Jon: But even still, death and evil are a real problem in our world all around us.
Tim: And so the story of the Bible ends
by describing this future day when Jesus comes back
and he finishes the job. He destroys the snake once and for all, and he restores
the goodness at the garden here on earth





The Gospel According to John. It's one of the earliest accounts of Jesus' life
and we learn at the end of the book that it comes from one of Jesus' closest
followers, called "the disciple whom Jesus loved." Now he appears many times in the story
itself and there's some debate about whether it's John the Son of Zebedee,
one of the twelve, or a different John, who lived in Jerusalem and was known in the
later church as John the Elder. Whichever John it was the book embodies his
eyewitness testimony and it's been brilliantly designed with a clear
purpose that he states near the end. John says: "the story is written so that you may
come to believe that Jesus is the Messiah and that by believing you may
have life in his name." John believes that the Jesus you read about in this book is
alive and real, and that he can change your life forever.
The book's design is really cool. Its first-half opens with an introductory
poem and short story that's followed by then a big block of stories about Jesus
performing miraculous signs that generate increasing controversy, and it
all culminates in his greatest sign: the raising of Lazarus which creates the
greatest controversy as Israel's leaders decide to kill Jesus. And that launches
into the book second half. These chapters focus on Jesus' final night and last
words to his disciples which are followed by his arrest, trial, death, and
resurrection. The book concludes with an epilogue. In this video we're just going
to focus on the first half. So the book opens with a two-part introduction.
First a poem that begins, "In the beginning was the Word" an obvious
allusion to Genesis 1 when God created everything with his word. Now a person's
words, they're distinct from that person, but they're also the embodiment of that
person's mind and will and so John says that God's Word was with God (that is
distinct) and yet the Word was God (that is divine) and as we ponder this claim we
hear later in the poem that this Divine Word became human in Jesus, then John
goes on to draw from the stories of Exodus saying that Jesus was God's
Tabernacle in our midst. The glorious divine presence that hovered over the
Ark of the Covenant became a human in Jesus, which leads to his last claim that
the one true God of Israel consists of God the
Father and the Son who has become human
to reveal the Father to us. Now as we consider these mind-bending claims we
then start to hear a story about how John the Baptist first met Jesus and
then led other people to meet him and become his disciples and one by one as
people encounter Jesus they say out loud who they think he is and in this one
chapter Jesus is given seven titles. Now these titles prepare us for John's love
of sevens in designing the book but altogether they also make a claim that
this fully human Jesus from Nazareth is the Messianic King, he's the teacher of
Israel, and he's the son of God who will die for the sins of the world.
Now that's a big claim to make about someone and John will now go on to
support it through the stories in chapters 2 through 12.
They all have the same basic pattern; Jesus will perform a sign or make a
claim about himself and that will result in misunderstanding or controversy and
so in the end of each story people are forced to make a choice about who they
think Jesus is. The first section shows Jesus encountering four classic Jewish
institutions and in each case
Jesus shows that he is the reality to which that institution pointed. So Jesus
is at a wedding party and the wine runs out and Jesus then turns these huge jugs
of water like a hundred and twenty gallons total into the best wine ever
and the head waiter says to the groom: "you've saved the best wine for last,"
which is of course true, but John also calls this miracle Jesus' first sign; in
other words it's a symbol that reveals something about Jesus. So just as Isaiah
said that the Messianic Kingdom would be like this huge party with lots of good
wine, so this first miraculous sign reveals the generosity of Jesus'
Kingdom. Next Jesus goes to the Jerusalem Temple (the place where heaven and earth
were supposed to come together and God would meet with his people) and Jesus
asserts his authority over it: running out all the money exchangers, stopping
the sacrificial offerings; and when the temple leaders threaten him he says,
"destroy this temple and I will raise it again in three days."
Jesus is claiming that his coming sacrificial death
is where heaven and earth will truly meet together. His body that will be
killed is the reality to which the temple building points. Then Jesus has
this all night conversation with a rabbi named Nicodemus who thinks that Jesus is
just like him, another rabbi and teacher for Israel, but Jesus says that Israel
needs much more than just another teacher with new information,
Israel needs a new heart and a new life or in his words, "no one can experience
God's kingdom without being born again." Jesus believes that humans are caught in
a web of selfishness and sin that leads to death, but he also knows that God
loves this world and so he's here to offer people a new birth, a new chance at
life. From here Jesus travels north and he ends up at a sacred well in a
conversation with a Samaritan (that is a non-Jewish woman) and they start
talking about water, which Jesus turns into a metaphor for himself. He says he's
here to bring living water that can become a source of eternal life. Now in
John this term refers to a new quality of life, one that's infused with God's
eternal love and it's a life that can begin now
and last on into the future. After this, John has designed another collection of
stories that took place during four Jewish sacred days or feasts, and again
Jesus uses the images related to the feasts to make claims about himself.
So Jesus first heals a paralyzed man on the Sabbath, which starts a controversy
with the Jewish leaders about working on the day of rest, and Jesus says it's his
Father who's working on the Sabbath and so is he
and they catch his meaning, that he was calling God his father making himself
equal with God, and so they want to kill him.
The next story takes place during Passover (the feast that retold the
Exodus story with the symbolic meal of the Lamb and bread and wine) and Jesus
miraculously provides food for a crowd of thousands which results in people
asking him for more bread and then Jesus goes on to claim that he is the true
bread and if they eat him
they will discover eternal life; and this offends many people who stop following him.
After this is the block of stories set in Jerusalem during the Feast of
Tabernacles (which retold the story of Israel's wilderness wanderings as God
guided them with the pillar of cloud and fire and provided them water in the
desert) and Jesus gets up in the temple courts and he shouts, "if anyone is thirsty
let them come to me and drink." And then later he says, "I am the light of the world."
He's claiming to be the illuminating presence of God and the life-saving gift
of God to his people, and some people believe and follow him but others are
offended and still others try to kill him for these exalted claims. The final
feast story is during Hanukkah (which means rededication). It's about how Judah
Maccabee cleared the temple of idols and set it apart as Holy once more, and Jesus
goes into the temple area and says that he is the one whom God has set apart as
the Holy One, and that he is the true temple where God's presence dwells, and
he also says, "I and the Father are one."
This makes the Jerusalem leaders so angry they set in motion a plan to kill
Jesus and so he retreats from the city. Now all these conflicts they culminate
in one last miraculous sign. Jesus hears that his dear friend Lazarus was sick,
but his family lives near Jerusalem which is now a death trap for Jesus. Now
Jesus could stay away and he would save his own life, but he loves Lazarus. So
once he hears that Lazarus has died he goes to raise him from the dead and he
calls him to life out of this tomb knowing that it will cost him his own
life. And the news of this amazing sign, it spreads quickly of course, and just as
Jesus knew would happen, the Jerusalem leaders hear about it and begin to
conspiring to murder him and so he rides into Jerusalem as Israel's King who's
rejected by its leaders. So the first half of John draws to a close with this
story about Jesus laying down his life as an act of love for his friend and
this of course is also a sign pointing forward to the cross which we'll explore
more in the next video but for now that's the first half of the Gospel of John.







The book of Ruth.
It's a brilliant work of theological art and it invites us to reflect on the question of
how God is involved in the day-to-day joys and hardships of our lives.
There are three main characters in the book:
Naomi, the widow, Ruth, the Moabite and Boaz, the Israelite farmer.
And their story is told in four chapters that are beautifully designed.
Let's just dive in and see how this all unfolds. Chapter one opens with this line: "In the days when the judges
ruled." And it reminds us of the very dark and difficult days from the book of
Judges. And here we meet an Israelite family in Bethlehem struggling to
survive through a famine. And so, in search of food, they move on to the land
of Moab, Israel's ancient enemy. And there, the father of the family dies and the
sons marry two Moabite women, Ruth and Orpah. And then the sons, they die too and so
they leave only Naomi and these new daughters-in-law. And so Naomi, she has no
reason to stay anymore. And so she tells her new daughters-in-law that she's
moving back home. And Naomi, she knows that the life of an unmarried foreign
widow in Israel is going to be very hard. So she compels the women to stay behind.
Orpah agrees but Ruth does not. She shows remarkable loyalty to Naomi and she says,
"Wherever you go, I'm going to go. Your people will become my people and your God will
become my God." And so the two of them return to Israel together and the chapter
concludes with Naomi changing her name
to Mara, which means "bitter" in Hebrew, and she laments her tragic fate. Chapter
two begins with Naomi and Ruth discussing where they're going to find
food and it just so happens to be the beginning of the barley harvest. And so
Ruth goes out to look for food and it just so happens that she ends up
picking grain in the field of a man named Boaz, who just so happens to be
Naomi's relative. We're told that Boaz is a man of noble character and
he notices her. So after finding out more about her story, he shows remarkable
generosity to her. He makes these special provisions so that the immigrant Ruth
can gather grain in his field. And in doing so
Boaz is actually obeying an explicit command in the Torah to show generosity
to the immigrant and the poor. Boaz is so impressed by Ruth's loyalty to Naomi,
he prays for her that God will reward her for her boldness. So Ruth comes home
that day and Naomi finds out that she met Boaz and she is thrilled. She says
Boaz is their family Redeemer. Now this "family redeemer" thing, this was a
cultural practice in Israel where if a man in the family died and he left
behind a wife or children or land, it was the family Redeemer's responsibility to
marry that widow, to take up the land and protect that family. So Naomi, she
begins to hope that perhaps there might still be a future for her family.
Chapter 3 begins with Naomi and Ruth making a plan to get Boaz to notice
their situation. So Ruth is going to stop wearing clothes of a grieving
widow and she's going to show signs that she is available to be married. And so
Ruth goes to meet Boaz on the farm that night and as she approaches, Boaz wakes
up. And he's totally startled. And Ruth makes her intentions very clear. She asks
if Boaz will redeem Naomi's family and marry her.
Boaz is once again amazed by Ruth's loyalty to Naomi and her family and he calls
Ruth a woman of noble character. It's the same term used to describe the woman in
Proverbs 31. So Boaz tells Ruth to wait until the next day and he will
redeem both Ruth and Naomi legally before the town elders. And so the
chapter ends with Ruth returning to Naomi and they marvel together at all of
these recent events. In chapter four it all comes together. It turns out, at the
last minute,
Boaz discovers there is a family member who's closer to Naomi than he is and
he's actually eligible before him to redeem the family. But at the last second
this family member finds out that he's going to have to marry Ruth the Moabite.
And so he declines. But Boaz, remember, he knows Ruth's true character, and so he
acquires the family property of Naomi and he marries Ruth. And so just as at the
beginning, how Ruth was loyal to Naomi's family, so now Boaz is loyal to Naomi's
family as well.
The story concludes with a reversal of all of the tragedies from chapter one. So
the death of the husband and the sons is reversed as Ruth is married again and
gives birth to a new son, granting joy to Naomi. And this symmetry between the opening and
the closing, its even more remarkable.
So, remember the opening tragedy was followed by a great act of loyalty on the
part of Ruth and that is now matched by Boaz's act of loyalty that leads to the
family's final restoration. And this symmetry, it highlights the design of the
internal chapters as well.
Each of the chapters begins with Naomi and Ruth making a plan for the future.
And that's followed by a providential meeting between Ruth and Boaz. And each
chapter concludes with Naomi and Ruth rejoicing at what's taken place. This
story is beautifully designed and that design actually connects with the really
interesting feature of the story and that's how little God is mentioned. The
characters talk about God a few times but the narrator actually never once
mentions God doing anything directly in the story and that its brilliance--
because God's providence is at work behind every scene of the story, weaving
together the circumstances and choices of all these characters. So Naomi, her
tragedy leads her to think that God is punishing her but actually the whole
story is about God's mission to restore her and her family. And he's doing so
through Ruth, through her boldness and loyalty, which brings healing to Naomi's life. But
not without Boaz, who's a no-nonsense farmer who's full of generosity and
loyalty. And so God uses his integrity combined with Ruth's boldness to save
Naomi and
her family. So this story brilliantly explores the interplay of God's purposes
and will with human decision and will. God weaves together the faithful
obedience of his people to bring about his redemptive purposes in the world. And
that leads to the real end of the story. The Book of Ruth concludes with the
genealogy showing how Boaz and Ruth's son, Oved, was the grandfather of King
David, from whom came the lineage of the Messiah. And so all of a sudden these
seemingly mundane, ordinary events in the story are woven into God's grand story
of redemption for the whole world. And so the book of Ruth invites us to consider
how God might be at work in the very ordinary, mundane details of our lives as
well. And that's what the book of Ruth is all about.





